Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuBy Thomas Insel on September 15, 2010September 12-18 is ADHD Awareness Week, a good time to reflect on progress and directions for future studies of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).ADHD is one of the most common childhood disorders, affecting nearly 5 percent of school-age children, with symptoms such as difficulty staying focused and paying attention, difficulty controlling behavior, and hyperactivity. Stimulant medications can help reduce the frequency or severity of ADHD symptoms for many people. For some, however, these medications provide little to no benefit. Like all medications, stimulants also carry the risk of side effects. In rare cases, the side effects of stimulants may be serious, such as raising blood pressure and heart rate. Finding new or better ways to treat ADHD is a central focus to many NIMH-funded studies.Large-scale clinical trials, such as the Multimodal Treatment Study of Children with ADHD (MTA) and Preschoolers with ADHD Treatment Study (PATS), have provided important clues about what makes treatment work, or not work, for different individuals. For example, some findings suggest that:Having effective methods for reducing core symptoms of ADHD can mean the difference between a child excelling at school or missing class due to inattention or disruptive behavior. But not all children respond well to currently available medications. Fortunately, some early behavioral interventions designed to reduce symptoms of ADHD in preschoolers may be effective alternatives or additions to medication treatment. Researchers are currently exploring a number of creative treatment approaches as well, such as nonstimulant medications, EEG biofeedback, and novel psychosocial therapies.The long-term consequences for work performance and social relationships in adulthood create a sense of urgency to identify ADHD and intervene as early as possible. Understanding the factors that contribute to better or poorer outcomes, and which treatments work best for which individuals, requires a more complete understanding of how the trajectories of brain development can differ in ADHD. For instance, a series of studies at NIMH studied one aspect of brain development: changes in cortical thickness in different regions of the brain across child development. In typical development, there is a pattern of increasing, and then decreasing, cortical thickness. Brain imaging in children with ADHD revealed that brain development followed the same pattern of increasing and then decreasing thickness, but the trajectory was delayed by an average of three years in some regions. Furthermore, these trajectories of brain development varied widely for children with ADHD, and the timing of delays was related to severity of symptoms. While cortical thickness is only one aspect of brain development, these findings illustrate that it is possible to correlate behaviors with brain differences, and may lead to improved treatments based on individual differences in symptom expression or biological characteristics. Other current studies of ADHD are revealing which neurotransmitters are affected by ADHD and which genes are correlated with ADHD symptoms and brain dysfunction. The results of these studies may reveal new approaches to treatment.While ADHD most often affects young children, the disorder can continue through adolescence. The impulsivity of ADHD can pose particular challenges for teens, leading to increased involvement in risky behaviors. Teenagers with ADHD get 3 times as many speeding tickets and are 4 times more likely to be involved in a car accident than their non-ADHD peers. ADHD can sometimes persist into adulthood.  More studies are needed to assess the effects of ADHD over the lifespan and to find better ways to diagnose and treat the disorder in adults, with a special attention to promoting competence and improving functioning.In addition to supporting research, NIMH also seeks to raise public awareness of mental illnesses. Learning about disorders like ADHD can make it easier to recognize when you or someone close to you needs help and to seek appropriate treatment.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuBy Thomas Insel on October 28, 2010The postpartum period is a time of major adjustment for new parents. Biological changes in mothers that occur after childbirth are often accompanied by significant changes in family roles and responsibilities as well. Generally, postpartum depression (PPD) is thought to be associated with the drastic changes in hormone levels that occur during and just after pregnancy. Couple that with the daunting challenges associated with caring for a newborn, and the estimated 7 to 13 percent prevalence rate i becomes less surprising. And likely, that number is on the low side because like many mental disorders, PPD is generally under-recognized and under-treated. Recently, disorders during the postpartum period have also been described in new fathers. iiCongress has taken note of the seriousness of PPD as well. The Affordable Care Act of 2010 specifically mentions the need “to continue activities on postpartum [conditions]…including research to expand the understanding of the causes of, and treatments for, postpartum conditions." iiiConsistent with Congressional interest, NIMH recently convened a workshop to encourage innovative research in PPD and other mood disorders that emerge during and after pregnancy. Participants discussed ways to optimize the use of currently available treatments based on a better understanding of individual differences among women. Studies of these individual differences, based on biomarkers, personal history or clinical features, will pave the path to personalized medicine. Meeting participants also discussed how to align new PPD research approaches with broader NIMH priority areas. These include research on comparative effectiveness, cost effectiveness, and global mental health.The current recommended treatments for women with PPD generally follow the course for any type of major depressive disorder (MDD) and include medication and psychotherapy. We now know that pregnancy is not protective against mental health disorders, and stopping antidepressants during pregnancy may lead to relapse. iv In addition, a mother’s depression can have physical effects on the fetus. But questions remain about how antidepressants affect a growing fetus or nursing baby. v Many pregnant or postpartum women choose not to take these medications. And although psychotherapy has been shown to be effective, getting access to evidence-based treatment can be difficult. So the need for alternatives, better treatments, and better delivery of services is great.What new treatments are on the horizon? In preliminary trials, 17-beta estradiol, a form of estrogen, was shown to have a relatively rapid antidepressant effect in women with PPD, faster than typical antidepressant medications like SSRIs, which can take up to 8 weeks to start working. And unlike antidepressants, evidence suggests that the increased levels of estrogen associated with the treatment are not detected in breast milk, and therefore presumably do not pass to the nursing newborn. viAnother NIMH study is modeling the effects of the normal hormonal changes in pregnancy and the postpartum period in non-pregnant women with a history of PPD, and comparing their progress with healthy volunteers. The study is testing whether hormonal events during the postpartum period trigger mood changes in women with PPD. It will serve as a source of information about both the biology of PPD and the factors that could put a woman at risk for developing it. Both of these studies provide evidence that the change in estrogen levels during the postpartum period may be a primary hormonal trigger for PPD.Other studies are looking at the pathophysiology of PPD by identifying changes in the pregnant and postpartum brain that may help us better understand the neurochemical vulnerability to this disorder. vii In particular, neurosteroids, some of which are the products of progesterone, have long been suspected as mediators of anxiety and recently have been implicated in PPD. In animal studies, the normal massive increase in neurosteroids during pregnancy and precipitous decline at childbirth is usually compensated by a change in GABA receptors in the cortex of the brain. Mice without this compensatory GABA receptor change manifest many of the features of postpartum depression, including profound deficits in maternal care.We know that women with a history of depression are at higher risk for PPD. What can we do to prevent it? Prevention is still a “work in progress." For example, current NIMH-funded research is investigating cognitive therapy and exercise programs to prevent PPD in pregnant women who are at high risk for PPD. NIMH is also funding studies to improve screening for PPD, web-based interventions and treatment models that use home visits.These studies are a good start. But we still have a long way to go in treating and preventing PPD, and understanding its long-term impact on families.i Gaynes BN, Gavin N, Meltzer-Brody S, Lohr KN, Swinson T, Gartlehner G, Brody S, Miller WC. Perinatal Depression: Prevalence, Screening Accuracy, and Screening Outcomes. Evidence Report/Technology Assessment No. 119. (Prepared by the RTI-University of North Carolina Evidence-based Practice Center, under Contract No. 290-02-0016.) AHRQ Publication No. 05- E006-2. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. February 2005.ii Paulson JF, Bazemore SD. Prenatal and postpartum depression in fathers and its association with maternal depression. Journal of the American Medical Association. 2010;303(19):1961-1969.iii 124 STAT. 344 PUBLIC LAW 111–148—MAR. 23, 2010 SEC. 2952.iv Cohen LS, Altshuler LL, Harlow BL, Nonacs R, Newport DJ, Viguera AC, Suri R, Burt VK, Hendrick V, Reminick AM, Loughead A, Vitonis AF, Stowe ZN. Relapse of major depression during pregnancy in women who maintain or discontinue antidepressant treatment. Journal of the American Medical Association . 2006 ;295(5):499-507.v Wisner KL, Sit DKY, Hanusa BH, Moses-Kolko EL, Bogen DL, Hunker DF, Perel JM, Jones-Ivy S, Bodnar LM, Singer LT. Major depression and antidepressant treatment: impact on pregnancy and neonatal outcomes. American Journal of Psychiatry. Online ahead of print March 15, 2009.vi Perheentupa A, Ruokonen A, Tapanainen JS. Transdermal estradiol treatment suppresses serum gonadotropins during lactation without transfer into breast milk. Fertility and Sterility. 2004 Oct;82(4):903-907.vii Maguire J, Mody I. GABAAR plasticity during pregnancy: relevance to postpartum depression. Neuron. 2008 Jul 31; 59.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuBy Thomas Insel on October 23, 2014Depression is prevalent—6.9 percent of Americans have been affected in the past 12 months.1 Depression is serious—according to the Global Burden of Disease study it accounts for the second largest medical source of years lost to disability in the U.S.2 And depression can be fatal—the suicide rate for people hospitalized for depression exceeds 6 percent.3 Can we predict risk for depression? There are no genetic tests or imaging tests that can be used to predict individual risk. But a longitudinal study from Ian Gotlib and colleagues at Stanford University is worth watching.This study has followed healthy (with no psychiatric diagnosis) daughters of mothers who have had multiple episodes of depression and a matched sample of healthy daughters of never depressed mothers. Although the high-risk daughters—those whose mothers have depression—showed no signs or symptoms of depression when they were first evaluated between ages 10 and 14, Gotlib notes that 60 percent have developed depression by age 18. In a paper published this month in Molecular Psychiatry, Gotlib and his colleagues report that 10- to 14-year-old-girls at risk for depression have shorter telomeres, relative to daughters of mothers who have never been depressed.4 Telomeres are the caps at the end of our chromosomes. They are essential for chromosomal stability and they naturally shorten with aging (findings recognized by the Nobel Prize in 2009). Indeed, telomere shortening is one of the most reliable signs of cellular aging.How could healthy 10- to14-year-old girls show signs of aging? The answer is not entirely clear but a second observation may provide an explanation. The same girls with shortened telomeres had increased stress reactivity, indicated by a steeper spike in the hormone cortisol in response to a simple stress test. Does the heightened stress reactivity lead to shorter telomeres? While there is an abundant literature linking developmental stress to risk for depression, we don’t know if stress reactivity is the mechanism for apparent cellular aging or if both stress reactivity and cellular aging reflect some other underlying process.Beyond suggesting a risk biomarker for early identification of depression, this finding indicates a troubling early sign of risk for premature biological aging and possibly age-related chronic diseases, such as cardiovascular disease. Investigating the cause and timing of decreased telomere length—to what extent it may result from abnormalities in stress responses or is genetically influenced, for example—will be important for understanding the relationship between cellular aging, depression, and other medical conditions.What can be done to reduce the risk of depression? In previous experiments, girls at risk for depression exhibited different patterns of brain activation during experimental mood regulation. In ongoing experiments, the Gotlib team is using neurofeedback to help these girls retrain their brain circuits and hopefully their stress responses. It will be a few years before we will know how much this intervention reduces risk for depression, but anything that prevents or slows the telomere shortening may be an early indication of success.1 U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. National Survey on Drug Use and Health, 2012. http://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/2k12MH_DetTbls/2k12MH_DetTbls/HTML/NSDUH-MHDetTabsTOC2012.htm.2 US Burden of Disease Collaborators. The state of US health, 1990-2010: burden of diseases, injuries, and risk factors. JAMA. 2013 Aug 14;310(6):591-608.3 Nordentoft M, Mortensen PB, Pedersen CB. Absolute risk of suicide after first hospital contact in mental disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011 Oct;68(10):1058-64.4 Gotlib IH et al. Telomere length and corticol reactivity in children of depressed mothers. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Sep 30. doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.119.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuBy Thomas Insel on February 9, 2015Some of us seem to cope better with life’s hard knocks than others. One might assume that the secrets to understanding these individual differences in resilience must be sought in the brain. Maybe not.Just a couple of weeks ago, NIMH’s Miles Herkenham and colleagues reported discovery of a counterintuitive route to stress resilience that works in mice – at least initially – via the peripheral immune system.1 The researchers wanted to know whether cells of the adaptive immune system might retain the memory of a psychological stress when transplanted into another animal. Based on previous results, it seemed unlikely that immune cells from an animal in a depression-like state might confer resilience to an unstressed animal.The researchers transplanted white blood cells (lymphocytes) from mice that had developed depression-like behaviors into mice of an experimental strain lacking lymphocytes – so that the foreign cells would readily integrate into their bodies. The treated naïve mice were markedly more sociable, less anxious and their brains showed increased birth of new cells and fewer inflammatory cells than control animals, following social stress. Control cells had no effect.Could it be that just as immune cells acquire the ability to fend off infectious agents to maintain homeostasis, they might similarly adapt to challenges to homeostasis in systems affecting brain and behavior? After all, it’s well known that the brain and the immune system are talking to each other. And other recent studies have demonstrated some remarkable effects of transfusing blood from one mouse to another, including rejuvenating effects in older mice receiving blood from juveniles.2But the mechanisms are not clear. Using the same social defeat mouse model in the innate immune system, Scott Russo recently reported that preexisting individual differences in mice’s blood levels of a key immune/inflammatory system messenger chemical predicted – and conferred risk for – vulnerability to depression-like behaviors.3 Levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6) were abnormally high in mice that avoided social situations after repeated encounters with a dominant animal. When the researchers gave previously resilient mice immune systems from vulnerable mice – through bone marrow transplants – they too developed the depression-like behaviors following social stress. By contrast, bone marrow transplants of stem cells that create white blood cells lacking IL-6 reduced the behaviors. So did inoculating vulnerable mice with IL-6-blocking antibodies.It’s still unclear how these two sets of provocative mouse findings jibe with each other. Seeming discrepancies might be traceable to diverging effects of the adaptive immune system versus the innate immune system. Using the same mouse model, John Sheridan has demonstrated effects more consistent with Russo’s pegged to the innate immune system.4 Yet both new studies suggest that individual differences in the immune system may affect susceptibility to stress. If these findings in mice extrapolate to humans, could our emotional responses to stress also be amenable to interventions via the peripheral immune system? Strategies for leveraging the brain through other peripheral channels, such as the blood-brain barrier, may also prove fruitful.Not only do we need to take off our brain-centric blinders in our search to understand resilience, but in light of the recent counterintuitive report, we also have to qualify simplistic notions that stress-triggered increases in immune/inflammatory responses are necessarily a bad thing.1 Lymphocytes from Chronically Stressed Mice Confer Antidepressant-Like Effects to Naive Mice. Brachman RA, Lehmann, ML, Maric D, Herkenham, M. Journal of Neuroscience, January 28, 2015, Volume 35, Number 4.2 Young blood reverses age-related impairments in cognitive function and synaptic plasticity in mice. Villeda SA, Plambeck KE, Middeldorp J, Castellano JM, Mosher KI, Luo J, Smith LK, Bieri G, Lin K, Berdnik D, Wabl R, Udeochu J, Wheatley EG, Zou B, Simmons DA, Xie XS, Longo FM, Wyss-CorayT. Nat Med. 2014 Jun;20(6):659-63. doi: 10.1038/nm.3569. Epub 2014 May 4. PMID:247932383 Individual differences in the peripheral immune system promote resilience versus susceptibility to social stress. Hodes GE, Pfau ML, Leboeuf M, Golden SA, Christoffel DJ, Bregman D, Rebusi N, Heshmati M, Aleyasin H, Warren BL, Lebonté B, Horn S, Lapidus KA, Stelzhammer V, Wong EH, Bahn S, Krishnan V, Bolaños-Guzman CA, Murrough JW, Merad M, Russo SJ. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Nov 11;111(45):16136-41. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1415191111. Epub 2014 Oct 20.PMID: 253318954 Stress-induced recruitment of bone marrow-derived monocytes to the brain promotes anxiety-like behavior.Wohleb ES, Powell ND, Godbout JP, Sheridan JF.J Neurosci. 2013 Aug 21;33(34):13820-33. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1671-13.2013. PMID:23966702The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuBy Thomas Insel on July 31, 2013Dr. Insel explains the nuances of the term, “serious mental illness.”Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on October 7, 2010Despite promising advances as a research tool, brain imaging is not quite ripe for clinical application in the diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders.Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on September 15, 2010Dr. Insel comments on progress and directions for future studies of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) during ADHD Awareness Week.Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on April 26, 2010May is Mental Health Month and this year NIMH teams up with SAMHSA to celebrate and promote Children’s Mental Health Awareness Day on May 6th. Dr. Insel talks about how mental illnesses are the chronic diseases of the young.Read MoreThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuBy Thomas Insel on June 30, 2015Researchers were able to reverse some of the behavioral effects of stress in mice by stimulating brain cells activated by pleasure. Dr. Insel describes the work and its implications for understanding depression.Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on June 5, 2015Dr. Insel discusses how the Precision Medicine Initiative will create a new kind of patient-driven research, which is similar to how innovative companies have created a new share economy based on trust.Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on March 3, 2015Dr. Insel lauds University of Washington psychiatrist and researchers Wayne Katon and the collaborative care approach for depression he helped develop.Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on February 9, 2015We tend to assume that the secrets to understanding individual differences in resilience to stress must be sought in the brain. Now, findings in mice suggest that the peripheral immune system might play a pivotal role.Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on October 23, 2014An early sign of depression risk may provide not only a biomarker for depression but a clue to the relationship between depression and risk for medical illnesses; Dr. Insel blogs.Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on October 1, 2014Ongoing research is investigating the long-term efficacy and safety of the anesthetic drug ketamine, which studies have shown can rapidly lift depressive symptoms; Dr. Insel talks about the status of ketamine in his blog.Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on July 31, 2013Dr. Insel explains the nuances of the term, “serious mental illness.”Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on August 24, 2012Numerous provocative advances in neuroscience were reported during the summer of 2012.Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on December 6, 2011Dr. Insel discusses the complicated nature of research on the efficacy antidepressants.Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on February 10, 2011Rapid progress in understanding how memory works – from the molecular to the behavioral level – holds promise for improved treatment of memory components of mental disorders.Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on December 23, 201010 breakthroughs and events of 2010 which are changing the way we approach mental disorders.Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on October 28, 2010Dr. Insel summarizes NIMH’s research efforts to better understand and treat postpartum depression.Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on October 7, 2010Despite promising advances as a research tool, brain imaging is not quite ripe for clinical application in the diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders.Read MoreThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuBy Thomas Insel on August 13, 2013In his blog, Dr. Insel talks about the National Research Action Plan, an effort announced by President Obama aimed at improving prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of mental health conditions and traumatic brain injury in military personnel.Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on July 31, 2013Dr. Insel explains the nuances of the term, “serious mental illness.”Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on May 28, 2012Serving Those Who ServedRead MoreBy Thomas Insel on November 10, 2011For Veterans Day, Dr. Insel discusses meeting the mental health needs of those who have so honorably served our country.Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on March 1, 2011As we mark the 10th anniversary of the human genome’s sequencing, the heightening pace of progress promises to a bright future for psychiatric genetics.Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on February 10, 2011Rapid progress in understanding how memory works – from the molecular to the behavioral level – holds promise for improved treatment of memory components of mental disorders.Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on October 7, 2010Despite promising advances as a research tool, brain imaging is not quite ripe for clinical application in the diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders.Read MoreBy Thomas Insel on January 20, 2010The U.S. Army recently released new suicide data for December 2009. Last month, there were 10 potential suicides among active duty soldiers, nine of which are pending confirmation. When added to the data for the rest of the year, the total number of reported suicides for 2009 among active duty soldiers is 160, 114 of which have been confirmed. By comparison, in 2008 there were 140 suicides among active duty soldiers.Read MoreThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuThis program supports research on mental disorders in the context of traumatic stress as well as basic dimensions of functioning (e.g., fear circuitry, working memory, arousal, emotion regulation) relevant to traditionally defined or perceived posttraumatic psychopathology among children and adolescents. This includes studies that examine the developmental course of, periods of vulnerability or sensitivity for, or risk processes related to the onset, progression, recurrence, and recovery from traumatic stress disorders and their relevant components as well as preventive and treatment interventions.Susan Borja, Ph.D. Program Chief 6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 7125, MSC 9632 301-443-1252, susan.borja@nih.govThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuLeft: Change in the 21-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS) following ketamine or placebo treatment. Right: Proportion of responders showing a 50 percent improvement on the HDRS following ketamine or placebo treatment.34Source: Carlos Zarate, M.D., Experimental Therapeutics and Pathophysiology Branch, NIMHThe most commonly used antidepressants are largely variations on a theme; they increase the supply within synapses of a class of neurotransmitters believed to play a role in depression. While these drugs relieve depression for some, there is a weeks-long delay before they take effect, and some people with “treatment-resistant” depression do not respond at all.The delay in effectiveness has suggested to scientists that the medication-induced changes in neurotransmitters are several steps away from processes more central to the root cause of depression. One possibility for a more proximal mechanism is glutamate, the primary excitatory, or activating, neurotransmitter in the brain. Preliminary studies suggested that inhibitors of glutamate could have antidepressant-like effects, and in a seminal clinical trial, the drug ketamine—which dampens glutamate signaling—lifted depression in as little as 2 hours in people with treatment-resistant depression.34The discovery of rapidly acting antidepressants has transformed our expectations—we now look for treatments that will work in 6 hours rather than 6 weeks. But ketamine has some disadvantages; it has to be administered intravenously, the effects are transient, and it has side effects that require careful monitoring. However, results from clinical studies have confirmed the potential of the glutamate pathway as a target for the development of new antidepressants. Continuing research with ketamine has provided information on biomarkers that could be used to predict who will respond to treatment.35 Clinical studies are also testing analogs of ketamine in an effort to develop glutamate inhibitors without ketamine’s side effects that can then be used in the clinic.36 Ketamine may also have potential for treating other mental illnesses; for example, a preliminary clinical trial reported that ketamine reduced the severity of symptoms in patients with PTSD. 37 Investigation of the role of glutamate signaling in other illnesses may provide the impetus to develop novel therapies based on this pathway.One of the imperatives of clinical research going forward will be to demonstrate whether the ability of a compound to interact with a specific brain target is related to some measurable change in brain or behavioral activity that, in turn, can be associated with relief of symptoms. In a study of ketamine’s effects in patients in the depressive phase of bipolar disorder, ketamine restored pleasure-seeking behavior independent from and ahead of its other antidepressant effects. Within 40 minutes after a single infusion of ketamine, treatment-resistant depressed bipolar disorder patients experienced a reversal of a key symptom—loss of interest in pleasurable activities—which lasted up to 14 days.38 Brain scans traced the agent’s action to boosted activity in areas at the front and deep in the right hemisphere of the brain. This approach is consistent with the NIMH’s RDoC project, which calls for the study of functions—such as the ability to seek out and experience rewards—and their related brain systems that may identify subgroups of patients with common underlying dysfunctions that cut across traditional diagnostic categories.The ketamine story shows that in some instances, a strong and repeatable clinical outcome stemming from a hypothesis about a specific molecular target (e.g., a glutamate receptor) can open up new arenas for basic research to explain the mechanisms of treatment response; basic studies can, in turn, provide data leading to improved treatments directed at that mechanism. A continuing focus on specific mechanisms will not only provide information on the potential of test compounds as depression medications, but will also help us understand which targets in the brain are worth aiming at in the quest for new therapies.PET scans revealed that ketamine rapidly restored bipolar depressed patients’ ability to anticipate pleasurable experiences by boosting activity in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (yellow) and related circuitry. Picture shows PET scan data superimposed on anatomical MRI.38  Source: Carlos Zarate, M.D., Experimental Therapeutics and Pathophysiology Branch, NIMHHighlight from Strategic Objective 3The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuMarch 2007The study reported online on March 28, 2007, in the New England Journal of Medicine describes the results of an acute depression medication trial conducted as part of the NIMH-funded Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder (STEP-BD). Participants were initially enrolled in the STEP-BD Best Practice Pathway, which provided rigorous individualized care from STEP-BD-certified treatment providers. Participants age 18 or older whose depression did not improve or who experienced a new depressive episode while in the Best Practice Pathway could enter this randomized controlled trial addressing antidepressant medication treatment options for acute depressive episodes. Of the 2,689 individuals who experienced an acute depressive episode while in the Best Practice Pathway, 366 were eligible and agreed to enter this randomized trial.Mood-stabilizing, or anti-manic, medication is a necessary component of adequate standard treatment in bipolar disorder. In the acute depression trial, the researchers wanted to determine if adding an antidepressant to a mood stabilizing treatment is more effective in treating a bipolar depressive episode than using a mood stabilizer alone. They also hoped to determine whether use of standard antidepressant medications could lead to a “switch” from depression to mania.Participants in this study were also offered the opportunity to receive psychosocial treatment (talk therapy) in addition to medication treatment. The results of that aspect of the study will be presented separately.The average person with bipolar disorder typically experiences major depressive episodes more than three times as frequently as symptoms of severe mood elevation or mania. Bipolar depression is difficult to treat, and its persistence and severity is associated with reduced ability to function in daily life. Researchers continue to debate about how best to treat bipolar depression, and whether antidepressants are helpful or might actually worsen the course of bipolar illness by causing manic or hypomanic symptoms (e.g., “affective switch”). The acute depression medication trial of STEP-BD was designed to provide answers to some of these important questions.The primary outcome measure for this study was the number of participants who achieved a “durable recovery” defined as at least eight consecutive weeks during which a participant had no more than two depressive or two manic symptoms. Although this eight-week “well” interval does not necessarily indicate long-term recovery for people with bipolar disorder, it is a more rigorous outcome measure than what is typically used in research studies in which success often is measured by a score on a depression-rating scale for only one week.Most clinical trials present findings based on a carefully selected group of research participants who may not be similar to persons seeking care in typical practice settings. By contrast, STEP-BD included “real world” patients already receiving care for their bipolar disorder. While in the Best Practice Pathway, participants were evaluated for their depressive status at every follow-up visit using standardized rating scales and assessment tools that recorded and tracked their treatment and assessed their symptoms. If a participant experienced depression, he or she could choose to leave the Best Practice Pathway and enter the acute depression medication trial. Finally, when the participant completed the acute depression trial, he or she could return to the Best Practice Pathway. This ensured that participants received continuity of care for as long as they chose to remain with the overall STEP-BD program.Before entering the acute depression medication trial, participants were required to take an adequate dose of mood-stabilizing medication (e.g., lithium, valproate, carbamazepine, or other anti-manic mood stabilizing medications as they became available). If necessary, study doctors adjusted the dosage levels of participants' mood-stabilizing medication to be certain that participants were receiving the most appropriate dose.After mood stabilizer doses were optimized, participants were then randomized to receive either one of the antidepressants—paroxetine (Paxil) or bupropion (Wellbutrin)—or a placebo, in addition to their mood stabilizer. The randomization of participants was double-blinded, meaning that neither the researchers nor the participants knew if an antidepressant or placebo was used alongside the mood stabilizer. This type of “placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomized clinical trial” produces objective results, since researchers, participants, and caregivers are not biased by their expectations about how well a medication worked.Of the 366 participants who entered the randomized depression trial, 179 were assigned to the group that received up to 26 weeks of either paroxetine or bupropion (in addition to the mood stabilizer) to treat their depression. The remaining 187 participants received a placebo, as well as their mood stabilizer. Participants were not assigned medications to which they had bad reactions in the past, that they were strongly opposed to, or that the treating psychiatrist felt was unsuitable for them. Additionally, participants could continue to receive any other necessary medications during the trial.Several antidepressants are used to treat depression associated with bipolar disorder. Bupropion (sustained-release formula) and paroxetine were chosen because they are commonly used for patients with bipolar-related depression. Compared to some other antidepressants, bupropion and paroxetine are less frequently associated with “treatment-emergent affective switch,” a term used to describe bipolar patients' mood changes between depression and mania.Of the 179 participants who received an antidepressant in addition to a mood stabilizer, 24 percent achieved a durable recovery (at least eight weeks with no more than two depressive or two manic symptoms), compared with 27 percent of the 187 participants who took a mood stabilizer plus placebo. Moreover, adding an antidepressant did not increase the risk of a switch to mania or hypomania. The similar rates of durable recovery indicate that the addition of an antidepressant medication to adequate, optimally dosed mood-stabilizing medications does not improve recovery from bipolar depression any more than adding a placebo.This study demonstrated that when treating bipolar depression, using a mood stabilizing medication alone results in a similar outcome compared to using a mood stabilizer plus an antidepressant medication. Therefore, there is no additional benefit from adding the antidepressant medications used in this trial. In addition, the results suggest that there is no increased risk of hypomanic or manic symptoms when paroxetine or bupropion is added to a mood stabilizer.Finally, because study participants tolerated both treatments well—less than 1 percent of participants suffered severe adverse effects—the results indicate that properly administered mood-stabilizing medication is an acceptable first line treatment for outpatients with bipolar depression.New! Clinical Trials Funding Opportunity AnnouncementsThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuApril 2007A. The study reported in the April 2007 issue of the Archives of General Psychiatry describes the results of a clinical trial examining the effectiveness of four psychosocial interventions for people with bipolar disorder who are experiencing a depressive episode. The clinical trial was part of the Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder (STEP-BD) research program, the largest, federally funded treatment trial ever conducted for bipolar disorder. STEP-BD enabled researchers to explore a range of treatment options related to bipolar disorder, including mood-stabilizing medications, antidepressants, atypical antipsychotic medications, and psychosocial interventions (talk therapies).Once enrolled in the STEP-BD program, participants aged 15 or older received individualized care from their STEP-BD treatment provider that included the best available treatment options. This approach was called the Best Practice Pathway. Participants in the Best Practice Pathway who were age 18 or older and whose depression did not improve or who experienced a new depressive episode, could enter the randomized clinical trial that examined the effectiveness of different combinations of medication and psychosocial therapy for the depressive phase of bipolar disorder.In this one-year randomized clinical trial, the goal of the psychosocial study was to determine if receiving intensive (and long-term) treatment with any one of the three psychosocial therapies offered in STEP-BD was more effective in relieving bipolar depression than receiving treatment with a brief, short-term talk therapy intervention.A. Although various treatments currently are available for treating bipolar disorder, including medications and talk therapies, it is not known if psychosocial interventions, when received alongside medication, can help relieve bipolar-related depression and keep patients well in typical, real-world clinical settings. In addition, most previous clinical trials were conducted in single academic centers and included carefully selected groups of research participants who may be different from the people seeking care in everyday practice settings.In this regard, the psychosocial treatment study in STEP-BD is unique because it included “real world” patients experiencing the early phases of a depressive episode, who were already receiving care for their bipolar disorder as part of STEP-BD. The therapists who delivered care in the psychosocial treatment study received STEP-BD training in the different psychosocial therapies by experts in the field. The training and ongoing supervision was of low intensity, consistent with what is typically available in clinical practice.A. While enrolled in the STEP-BD Best Practice Pathway, participants were evaluated for depression at every follow-up visit. These clinic visits recorded and tracked participants’ treatment and assessed their symptoms and clinical status for the duration of participation in the study. If the study participants experienced a depressive episode, they could choose to leave the Best Practice Pathway and enter the randomized portion of STEP-BD; 366 participants did so.The randomized acute depression study lasted 26 weeks and addressed the question of whether adding an antidepressant medication (buproprion or paroxetine) to an existing mood stabilizing medication is more effective for treating acute bipolar-related depression than adding a placebo pill. All participants in this portion were required to be on a mood stabilizing medication, such as lithium, valproate, carbamazepine or other mood stabilizer approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.These 366 participants also had the option of participating in the randomized psychosocial treatment study in which they would receive psychosocial treatment in addition to their medication treatment. Of the 366 participants who entered the randomized depression trial, 236 chose to enter the psychosocial portion. In addition, 57 STEP-BD participants who were enrolled in the Best Practice Pathway, but who were not part of the medication portion of the randomized depression trial, chose to enter the psychosocial study as well. Altogether, 293 participants took part in the psychosocial treatment study. Many of those who chose not to participate in the psychosocial portion of the study were already receiving psychotherapy on their own.A. Researchers randomly assigned participants to receive either a short-term collaborative care intervention or one of three longer-term intensive therapies that have been shown to help stabilize bipolar symptoms—cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), interpersonal and social rhythm therapy (IPSRT), or family-focused treatment (FFT). Collaborative care was considered the “control” intervention, meaning that the outcomes of this therapy were used as a baseline by which to compare the other three intensive therapies. All of these therapies focused on education about the illness, relapse prevention planning, and bipolar illness management interventions, and all but collaborative care consisted of up to 30, 50-minute sessions that took place over nine months.Collaborative care, which consisted of three, 50-minute sessions over six weeks, provided participants with a workbook, an educational videotape and other information that aimed to help them understand and manage the illness, maintain adherence to medications, and develop a treatment contract geared toward preventing bipolar episodes.In the CBT intervention group, participants received education about the illness. They learned to challenge negative thoughts or beliefs about bipolar disorder or its associated stressful life circumstances, developed schedules to stay active, and developed strategies to detect and cope with mood swings.The focus of IPSRT was on attaining and maintaining regular social rhythms (daily routines and sleep/wake cycles) and the relationship of daily activities to mood and levels of social stimulation. IPSRT therapists encouraged participants to keep track of their daily routines (e.g., when they went to sleep, when they woke up, etc.) while working toward establishing stable social rhythms. Patients also worked to resolve key interpersonal problems related to grief, role transitions, interpersonal disputes, or interpersonal skill deficits.In FFT, participants and their relatives (e.g., spouses and parents) were taught an understanding of bipolar illness, its course, treatment and management. Family members were taught how to recognize early warning signs that might predict an oncoming depressive or manic episode in the person with bipolar illness, and strategies to intervene when these warning signs occurred. Treatment included enhancing communication between the participants and their family members to improve the quality of family interactions, and problem-solving to manage conflicts related to the illness.A. The outcome measures that were used to evaluate success of the treatments were “time to recovery” (e.g., how quickly did people get well) and the total amount of time during the study year that participants remained “well” (measured by the probability of being well during any given month). To be considered “well” in the study, participants had to have no more than two symptoms of mild or moderate mania or depression.Of the 293 STEP-BD participants in the psychosocial treatment study, 59 percent recovered from their depression; 41 percent either did not recover or left the study early.Over the course of the study year, participants in the intensive psychotherapies (FFT, IPSRT, CBT) had a more successful recovery rate (64 percent) compared to the individuals in the collaborative care group (52 percent). Also, participants in the intensive psychotherapies who recovered did so faster (on average, after about 113 days) than those in the collaborative care group (after about 146 days). Furthermore, the participants in the intensive psychotherapies were one and a half times more likely to remain well during any given month of the study year than those in the collaborative care group.The study also showed that in each of the four psychosocial treatment groups, participants who were also enrolled in the randomized medication portion of the trial got well faster than those who were not, even though all patients were receiving some type of medication. In addition, recovery time was faster in all four groups for those participants who had family supports available.Differences among the three intensive psychosocial interventions were not statistically significant, but they are worth noting. Over the yearlong study, 77 percent of participants in the FFT recovered, compared to 65 percent of participants in IPSRT and 60 percent in CBT.A. This one-year study showed that, in conjunction with adequate mood stabilizing medications, intensive psychotherapy is more effective in helping people recover from a depressive episode, and stay well over a one-year period, than a brief collaborative care treatment. All three types of intensive psychosocial treatments had comparable benefits.Overall, psychotherapy appears to be a vital part of the effort to stabilize episodes of depression in bipolar illness. These findings should help clinicians plan treatments for individuals recovering from an episode of bipolar depression.New! Clinical Trials Funding Opportunity AnnouncementsThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuMarch 2007A. STEP-BD is the largest, federally-funded treatment study ever conducted for bipolar disorder1. It is a long-term outpatient study that enrolled 4,360 participants from 22 sites over seven years (1998 to 2005). STEP-BD was designed to find out which treatments, or combinations of treatments, are most effective for treating episodes of depression and mania and for preventing recurrent episodes in people with bipolar disorder. STEP-BD is different from typical clinical trials that test one potential new treatment. It is a broad research program that includes several different studies, each aimed at a different aspect of treatment for the illness.Multiple treatments, including medications and psychotherapies, currently are available for people with bipolar disorder, but doctors are often uncertain which of these treatments actually work best for specific aspects of the illness.2 STEP-BD’s size, scope and broad criteria for inclusion of participants will make its findings relevant to all patients seeking the most effective care for the disorder, and provide much needed information to help doctors choose treatments for the everyday care of those with the disorder.A. STEP-BD differs from traditional bipolar disorder clinical trials in several important ways. Because the main goal of STEP-BD is to improve treatment and outcomes for all people with bipolar disorder, it was designed as a large-scale, public health study that included real-world patients contending with multiple mental and/or physical illnesses who are seeking care in their own communities. Most other clinical research studies exclude people with co-existing disorders, thus limiting those studies’ real-world applicability.In addition, STEP-BD was long-term. In most clinical trials, individuals are usually asked to participate for a relatively short period of time (e.g., 8-12 weeks), and receive only one of a few treatments being studied. In contrast, STEP-BD offered participants long-term continuity of care. Once enrolled, participants could receive care for as long as they were in the program — up to five years — and were monitored systematically, even when they were feeling well.STEP-BD also assessed participants’ “clinical status” every three to six months at a minimum for as long as they were in the program, a different process from other bipolar illness clinical studies in which a treatment’s success may be measured with only a single measurement at one point in time. At each follow-up, participants were determined to be recovered, recovering, continuing to have residual symptoms, or in a full mood episode (depression, mania, hypomania, or mixed). Finally, unlike other trials, doctors participating in STEP-BD were extensively trained in the use of evidence-based treatments to become “STEP certified.” STEP-BD’s rigorous treatment and measurement process, known as the Best Practice Pathway, allowed clinicians to evaluate their patients’ full range of symptoms and monitor the course of the illness.If participants experienced a change in clinical status, such as a depressive episode, they could choose to enter a STEP-BD “randomized controlled clinical trial.” The randomized controlled clinical trials of STEP-BD were designed to answer a specific treatment question using traditional clinical trials methodology. Regardless of the outcome of care within the randomized controlled trials, participants could remain in STEP-BD and under the care of their STEP-BD clinician.A. STEP-BD aimed to determine which treatments or combination of treatments are most effective for treating episodes of depression and mania and for preventing recurrent episodes. STEP-BD assessed the outcomes of many of the most established treatments used for bipolar disorder, including; mood-stabilizing medications; antidepressants; atypical antipsychotic medications; and standardized psychosocial interventions that included family-focused treatment, interpersonal and social rhythm therapy, and cognitive behavioral therapy, all of which were compared to a brief psychosocial control treatment. All psychotherapy treatments were geared toward helping participants and their families better understand the disorder, develop coping strategies and stick to treatment plans, and were always given in conjunction with medication treatment. Medication and dosing recommendations were derived from published, evidence-based treatment guidelines.Best Practice Pathway participants, all of whom were age 15 and older, received individualized care based on their symptoms, past history, medical conditions, and other factors. Most received mood-stabilizing (anti-manic) medication and, where necessary, additional medications as indicated by best practices guidelines. Participants and their doctors worked together to decide on the best treatment plan, and changed these plans if needed. Those wishing to stay on their current treatment plan upon entering STEP-BD could also do so in this pathway.Participants in the Best Practice Pathway who were 18 years and older could enter a STEP-BD randomized clinical trial if they met certain eligibility requirements. The largest randomized trial studied treatment options for the acute depressive episode and included both medication and psychotherapy. In the randomized trials, participants were never assigned medications to which they had bad reactions in the past, that they were strongly opposed to, or that the doctor felt was unsuitable for them. Participants in the randomized trials could return to the Best Practice Pathway for their treatment at any time.Having both a Best Practice Pathway and randomized clinical trials allowed the researchers to compare outcomes from each trial (all of which focused on a specific research question) with outcomes from those who remained in the Best Practice Pathway. This is important because it gave researchers an opportunity to understand if the results might differ for subjects willing to accept treatment assigned at random under double — blind conditions, versus those who might find such treatment unacceptable.A. Participants in STEP-BD received at least one type of active mood stabilizing medication throughout the study; at no time were participants ever medication-free. However, in the double-blind randomized clinical trial involving the use of antidepressants to treat bipolar depression, placebo (in combination with mood stabilizing medications) was used as a control. Participants, all of whom continued to take a mood stabilizing medication, were randomized to either an antidepressant as an adjunctive, or to a placebo as an adjunctive. The trial aimed to determine if the adjunctive antidepressant was more effective than a mood stabilizer by itself in treating bipolar depression.A. Overall, 4,360 individuals were enrolled in STEP-BD. All had a diagnosis of bipolar disorder. STEP-BD also included individuals with other co-existing psychiatric disorders (such as anxiety disorders or personality disorders) and/or physical illnesses.Throughout their involvement in the study, participants met with their STEP-BD doctor for periodic evaluations and/or treatment adjustments. These visits were more frequent earlier in the study, or when a new treatment was added. Participants also completed various self-evaluation forms during the study. However, participants could decline to answer any questions, and could remain in the study even if their participation was inconsistentBecause STEP-BD was designed to manage and evaluate participants’ long-term outcomes, the research program was active for seven years, and participants were involved for as long as they wanted during this time. Those participants who were involved in any randomized studies and who responded well to their treatment were asked to stay on that study medication for up to six months. Participants could return to the Best Practice Pathway for continued individualized treatment and monitoring after that.A. Researchers are using the extensive data from STEP-BD to ask multiple, sharply focused research questions, such as how best to treat individuals with various expressions of the disorder (e.g., manic, mixed, or depressive episodes, rapid cycling, bipolar II vs. bipolar I disorder) and prevent recurrence. Other research questions include evaluating the special needs of women with the disorder, and evaluating treatment outcomes for those with co-occurring medical or mental illnesses. STEP-BD researchers will also evaluate how treatments affect a person’s quality of life, such as social functioning and the ability to work; the cost-effectiveness of the combinations of treatments; and factors that affect a person’s continued use of each treatment. Therefore, many different findings have and will be published, as researchers analyze available data. For a list of findings published to date, see Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder (STEP-BD)A. STEP-BD medications used in the Best Practice Pathway were paid for by participants through their own individual insurers and/or out of pocket. In the randomized controlled clinical trials, medications were provided to participants free of charge. These medications were donated by the following pharmaceutical companies:Pharmaceutical companies were invited to provide feedback on the recommended dosing of their own medications. However, the pharmaceutical companies had no input into the design or implementation of the study, planning or conducting of the data analyses, or preparation of manuscripts for publication.A. STEP-BD has collected DNA from more than 2,300 participants. This genetics repository, which will be the largest DNA collection to be used exclusively for studying bipolar disorder, will be used along with the clinical data to study how genes may affect bipolar disorder. It also may help us predict who will respond best to what treatment, and lead to more personalized care.In addition, a STEP-BD-related genetics project, a type of patient registry called the Family Association Study, is ongoing. Researchers are collecting blood samples from biological parents and siblings of the STEP-BD genetics participants. These samples will be used to help identify genes that contribute to bipolar disorder. The STEP-BD dataset will make a significant contribution to the field of bipolar treatment research.A. After a competitive, peer-reviewed process, NIMH selected the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, MA to implement the STEP-BD study. The trial was led by Dr. Gary S. Sachs of the Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, with the help of Dr. Michael E. Thase of the University of Pittsburgh Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, and Dr. Mark S. Bauer of the Providence Veterans Affairs Medical Center and Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Brown University. The Epidemiology Data Center at the University of Pittsburgh, led by Dr. Stephen R. Wisniewski, collected and analyzed the study data.Over the course of the seven years of the study, 22 research centers around the United States enrolled and treated participants. Thirteen centers participated for the majority of the active project, and participants from these centers comprise 90 percent of the total number enrolled.Additional centers involved in STEP-BD were: Howard University, Washington DC; Rush-Presbyterian St. Luke’s Medical Center, Chicago, IL; State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY; Weill Medical College of Cornell University and New York Presbyterian Hospital, NY, NY; New York University School of Medicine, NY, NY; University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA; University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ; and Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC.1. Sachs, GS, Thase, ME, Otto, MW, Bauer M, Miklowitz, D, Wisniewski, SR, Lavori, P, Lebowitz, B, Rudorfer M, Frank E, Nierenberg, AA, Fava, M, Bowden, C, Ketter, T, Marangell, L, Calabrese, J, Kupfer, D, Rosenbaum, JF. Rationale, Design, and Methods of the Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for Bipolar Disorder (STEP-BD). Biological Psychiatry 2003, 53:1028-1042..2. Kogan JN, Otto MW, Bauer MS, Dennehy EB, Miklowitz DJ, Zhang H, Ketter T, Rudorfer MV, Wisniewski SR, Thase ME, Calabrese J, Sachs GS. Demographic and diagnostic characteristics of the first 1000 patients enrolled in the Systematic Treatment Enhancement Program for bipolar disorder (STEP-BD) Bipolar Disorders 2004; 6: 460-469.New! Clinical Trials Funding Opportunity AnnouncementsThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuThe Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS) is a multi-site clinical research study examining the short- and long-term effectiveness of an antidepressant medication and psychotherapy alone and in combination for treating depression in adolescents ages 12 to 17. Thirteen academic and community clinics across the country were involved in the $17 million trial.TADS is important because major depression is one of the most common disorders of adolescence and occurs in both girls and boys. Experts estimate that in the United States, about 5 percent—or one in 20 teens—have moderate to severe major depression. This means that in a high school of 1,000 adolescents, 50 are likely to have major depression on any given day.1 Adolescents with major depression suffer greatly and have difficulty with peer relationships and in school. The illness also imposes a significant burden on the teen’s family. Many, but not all, adolescents with depression have suicidal thoughts. Without effective treatment, some may die by suicide.The initial findings published in the August 18, 2004, issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA), provide data from the first 12-week treatment period. The 36-week results were published in the Archives of General Psychiatry in October 2007.A. TADS included 439 participants ages 12 to 17 from various geographic regions in the United States who were diagnosed with major depression. Recruitment for the trial began in Spring 2000 and ended in Summer 2003.A. For the first 12 weeks of their study participation (Stage 1), participants were randomly assigned to receive one of four treatmentsAt the end of the first 12 weeks, participants taking pills were informed if they were taking placebo or the active medication fluoxetine. Those taking the placebo who were not improved could choose to receive any one of the other three treatments in the study—fluoxetine alone, CBT alone, or combination therapy. Participants who did improve while taking placebo were followed by the researchers for up to 12 weeks and offered active treatment if their depression worsened during that time.Participants in any of the three active treatment groups (fluoxetine, CBT, or the combination treatment) who improved during the first 12 weeks continued with their assigned treatments for six more weeks (Stage 2). Participants who continued to do well in Stage 2 progressed to Stage 3, which lasted another 18 weeks for a total of 36 weeks of study participation.Fluoxetine is the only antidepressant medication approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in treating adolescents with depression.CBT is a talk therapy that teaches a person how to better cope with the challenges of depression and life in general. Specifically, a therapist may educate his or her patient about depression, the possible causes of it and how to manage it. He or she may also help the patient set realistic and positive personal goals, encourage participation in pleasant activities, learn to solve social problems, discourage negative thinking, learn how to negotiate and compromise when conflicts arise, and foster assertiveness.A. After the first 12 weeks, 71 percent of participants receiving the combination treatment were much or very much improved. Among those receiving fluoxetine alone, 61 percent improved, and among those receiving CBT alone, 44 percent improved. Among those receiving a placebo, 35 percent improved.Results remained consistent at the end of 18 weeks and 36 weeks. At 18 weeks, combination treatment still outpaced the other treatments with an 85 percent response rate, compared to 69 percent for fluoxetine alone and 65 percent for CBT alone.By 36 weeks, the response rate to combination treatment still remained the highest (86 percent), while response rates to fluoxetine and CBT essentially caught up, at 81 percent each.It is important to note that suicidal thinking decreased substantially in all active treatment groups.  However, during treatment, those taking fluoxetine alone had higher rates of new and alarming suicidal thinking or behavior (15 percent) than those in combination treatment (8 percent) and those in CBT alone (6 percent), particularly in the early stages of treatment. There were no suicides in the TADS study.A. The results suggest that combination treatment is the safest and most effective treatment overall for adolescents with depression. Fluoxetine alone or in combination with CBT accelerates recovery from major depression compared to CBT alone. Although the response rate of CBT alone “catches up” to the response rate of fluoxetine alone several weeks later and to the combination therapy several months later, those few months in the life of an adolescent with depression can seem like a very long time. Further, adding CBT also appears to lessen the risk of suicidal thinking and behavior in patients given fluoxetine, and helps them develop new skills to contend with difficult, negative emotions.However, every child or adolescent is different, and no one-size-fits-all treatment approach exists. Decisions about treatment for adolescents with depression must be made on a case-by-case basis. Before starting treatment, each child should be carefully and thoroughly evaluated by a doctor to determine if medication is appropriate. Those who are prescribed an antidepressant should be monitored regularly and frequently by a health care professional, especially during the first few weeks.For more information about treating depression in adolescents, visit the NIMH Depression in Children and Adolescents Web page.A. Following the end of the treatment period, the TADS team recommended ways in which participants could maintain treatment on their own, depending on the specific needs of the individual. Recommendations included continuing to take medication and see the doctor periodically, or continuing to work with a therapist and apply the behavioral techniques learned in CBT. Participants then were asked to return for an assessment every three months, for one year. At these visits, participants were interviewed about their symptoms and administered questionnaires similar to those used at the beginning of the study. In addition, the TADS doctors met with the family when needed or requested during that year to discuss recommendations for treatment options available in the community.  Results of this year-long follow-up period will be available in the future.A. Because the trial sample included a mix of younger and older teens; both genders; and ethnic, racial, and socioeconomic diversity, the TADS results can be applied broadly to the adolescent population.A. TADS was sponsored by the National Institute of Mental Health and coordinated by the Department of Psychiatry and the Duke Clinical Research Institute at Duke University Medical Center. The principal investigator for the study was John March, M.D., MPH. The principal statistician was Susan Silva, Ph.D., also of Duke University.Eli Lilly and Company provided the fluoxetine and matching placebo to Duke University under an independent educational grant. Eli Lilly had no role in the design or implementation of the study, analysis of the data, or writing of the manuscripts.TADS was monitored for safety by the NIMH Data Safety and Monitoring Board.A. NIMH has funded other studies involving adolescents with depression, including the Treatment of Resistant Depression in Adolescents (TORDIA) study and the Treatment of Adolescent Suicide Attempters (TASA) study. Results for these trials are pending. NIMH has also funded the Antidepressant Safety in Kids (ASK) study, in which short and long-term risks of antidepressant use among children and adolescents will be assessed. For a complete list of all NIMH clinical trials, visit the Clinical Trials page on the NIMH Web site or ClinicalTrials.gov.A. The TADS materials are available on the TADS Web site.For a complete listing of TADS publications, see the ClinicalTrials.gov TADS record.1. Essau C, Dobson K. Epidemiology of depressive disorders. In: Essau C, Petermann F, eds. Depressive Disorders in Children and Adolescents: Epidemiology, Course and Treatment. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson Inc; 1999:69-103.New! Clinical Trials Funding Opportunity AnnouncementsThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuThe NIMH-funded Treatment of SSRI-resistant Depression in Adolescents (TORDIA) study is a multi-site, clinical research study examining treatment options for teens whose depression has not improved after one adequate trial of a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI), a type of antidepressant. This page provides information about the study.New! Clinical Trials Funding Opportunity AnnouncementsThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.Concept Clearance • October 19, 2018Mary Rooney, Ph.D. Division of Services and Intervention ResearchThe goal of this FOA is to support research that evaluates the effectiveness of augmented or modified interventions designed to promote enhanced and sustained improvement in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) symptoms and functional impairments across settings and transitions throughout childhood, adolescence, and young adulthood.ADHD is an impairing and costly chronic condition that profoundly affects all domains of functioning (e.g., academic, social, occupational) and health-related quality of life. The clinical trajectory of ADHD is often devastating, with outcomes of academic and occupational underachievement, substance abuse and dependence, self-injurious behavior, accident-related injury, obesity and other physical health problems, strained marital and parent-child relationships, and financial problems. Comorbid conditions frequently accompany ADHD and amplify negative long-term outcomes. Approximately 6.4 million children and adolescents (9.4%) in the US have received an ADHD diagnosis.While research supports the short-term efficacy of evidence-based treatments (EBTs) for ADHD, the majority are focused exclusively on elementary school-aged children and are associated with intervention effects that dissipate over time. The sustained use of interventions and the maintenance of treatment gains is hampered, in part, by a lack of interventions optimized for delivery across settings (e.g., home, academic, childcare, extracurricular, occupational) and key developmental transitions (e.g., elementary school to middle school, middle school to high school, high school to post-secondary education or employment). Modifiable factors associated with the sustained impact of ADHD interventions and the long-term trajectory of ADHD symptoms and impairments have been identified in the literature, yet few evidence-supported strategies exist for tailoring interventions across development based on these targets. Refinements and augmentations to existing EBTs are needed to promote service-ready interventions capable of sustaining treatment effects across settings and developmental transitions.Theory-driven, developmentally-informed projects might develop and test service-ready strategies that: (1) remediate residual problems related to functional impairment, or problems otherwise associated with a negative developmental course; (2) overcome generalization challenges across settings, developmental transitions, and intervention agents (e.g., teachers, parents, etc.); (3) address sustained adherence to psychosocial and pharmacological interventions; (4) incorporate empirically informed approaches that anticipate or intervene early with predictable downstream comorbidities and health-related consequences (e.g., anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, eating disorders, personality disorders, substance misuse and abuse, obesity).The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.Program AnnouncementThe National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) encourages investigator-initiated research to enhance scientific understanding about the etiology of psychopathology related to violence and trauma, as well as studies to develop and test effective treatments, services, and prevention strategies in this area. The NIMH mission encompasses the conduct and support of biomedical and behavioral research, and the translation of scientifically generated information into clinical applications and interventions implemented in the community.The populations and phenomenon of concern include children, youth, adults, and the elderly, males and females, and all racial and ethnic groups. Studies of interest can focus on victims/survivors of interpersonal violence and crime, such as child abuse and neglect, rape, sexual assault, family violence, community violence and victims/survivors of major traumatic events, such as combat and war, mass shootings, terrorism, natural and technological disaster, refugee trauma and relocation, and torture.Because the consequences of violence and traumatic stress typically involve several factors, the portfolio of NIMH research is multidisciplinary in nature. For example, the portfolio encompasses animal studies of the biological and behavioral effects of unpredictable and uncontrollable stress, mechanistic and descriptive studies of behavioral and biological dysregulation in humans, and clinical studies examining how the severity of post traumatic symptoms is linked to neural functioning, processing of memories, and interpretations of trauma. It also encompasses research to develop, test, and disseminate effective interventions addressing the sequelae of violence and trauma. NIMH encourages research that incorporates genetic, environmental, and neurobiological parameters as they relate to adjustment and psychopathology throughout life, as well as studies of implementation of proven treatments at the individual, clinic, organizational, and systems levels.Farris Tuma, Sc.D.Division of Adult Translational Research and Treatment DevelopmentNational Institute of Mental Health6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 5197, MSC 9589Bethesda, MD 20892-9589Telephone: 301-443-5944Fax: 301-480-4415e-mail: ftuma@nih.govSteven J. Zalcman, M.D.Division of Adult Translational Research and Treatment DevelopmentNational Institute of Mental Health6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 7177 MSC 9639Bethesda, MD 20892-9639301-443-1692Fax: 301-402-4740e-mail: szalcman@mail.nih.govDenise Juliano-Bult, MSWDivision of Services and Intervention ResearchNational Institute of Mental Health6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 7146 MSC 963Bethesda, MD 20892-9639Phone: 301-443-1638Fax: 301-443-4045e-mail: djuliano@mail.nih.govThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.Q1. How do NIMH priorities in stress biology research vary across institute divisions? A1. Current priorities of the Division of Neuroscience and Basic Behavioral Science (DNBBS) and the Division of Translational Research (DTR) are provided in A3 and A4, respectively.Q2. Are these priorities up-to-date? A2.  The priorities listed below are current. NIMH regularly re-assesses strategic and programmatic priorities. This FAQs page will be kept up-to-date with any new or altered priorities. The best way to obtain information regarding the fit of a specific project with NIMH priorities is to contact a program officer via NIMHStressBioRes@mail.nih.gov.Q3. What are DNBBS current priorities in stress biology research? A3. Current DNBBS priorities in stress biology research include, but are not limited to:Q4: What are DTR’s current priorities in stress biology research? A4: Current DTR priorities in stress biology research include, but are not limited to:Q5. How can I obtain more information on whether my project is appropriate for NIMH assignment?  A5. Please send inquiries and draft specific aims pages to NIMH Program Staff at NIMHStressBioRes@mail.nih.gov.Last Updated: October 17, 2018The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuThis factsheet discusses five things to know about stress and how to manage it.En EspañolRead moreThis brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).En EspañolRead moreThis brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a chronic disorder in which a person has uncontrollable, reoccurring thoughts and behaviors.En EspañolRead moreThis brochure discusses symptoms, causes, and treatments for panic disorder, a type of anxiety disorder associated with sudden and repeated attacks of fear.En EspañolRead moreThis brochure discusses symptoms, causes, and treatments for social anxiety disorder (also called social phobia), a type of anxiety disorder associated with intense, persistent fear of being watched and judged by others.En EspañolRead moreThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuThis factsheet discusses five things to know about stress and how to manage it.En EspañolRead moreThis brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).En EspañolRead moreThis brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a chronic disorder in which a person has uncontrollable, reoccurring thoughts and behaviors.En EspañolRead moreThis brochure discusses symptoms, causes, and treatments for panic disorder, a type of anxiety disorder associated with sudden and repeated attacks of fear.En EspañolRead moreThis brochure discusses symptoms, causes, and treatments for social anxiety disorder (also called social phobia), a type of anxiety disorder associated with intense, persistent fear of being watched and judged by others.En EspañolRead moreThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuOccasional anxiety is an expected part of life. You might feel anxious when faced with a problem at work, before taking a test, or before making an important decision. But anxiety disorders involve more than temporary worry or fear. For a person with an anxiety disorder, the anxiety does not go away and can get worse over time. The symptoms can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, school work, and relationships.There are several types of anxiety disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and various phobia-related disorders.People with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) display excessive anxiety or worry, most days for at least 6 months, about a number of things such as personal health, work, social interactions, and everyday routine life circumstances. The fear and anxiety can cause significant problems in areas of their life, such as social interactions, school, and work.Generalized anxiety disorder symptoms include:People with panic disorder have recurrent unexpected panic attacks. Panic attacks are sudden periods of intense fear that come on quickly and reach their peak within minutes. Attacks can occur unexpectedly or can be brought on by a trigger, such as a feared object or situation.During a panic attack, people may experience:People with panic disorder often worry about when the next attack will happen and actively try to prevent future attacks by avoiding places, situations, or behaviors they associate with panic attacks. Worry about panic attacks, and the effort spent trying to avoid attacks, cause significant problems in various areas of the person’s life, including the development of agoraphobia (see below).A phobia is an intense fear of—or aversion to—specific objects or situations. Although it can be realistic to be anxious in some circumstances, the fear people with phobias feel is out of proportion to the actual danger caused by the situation or object.People with a phobia:There are several types of phobias and phobia-related disorders:Specific Phobias (sometimes called simple phobias): As the name suggests, people who have a specific phobia have an intense fear of, or feel intense anxiety about, specific types of objects or situations. Some examples of specific phobias include the fear of:Social anxiety disorder (previously called social phobia): People with social anxiety disorder have a general intense fear of, or anxiety toward, social or performance situations. They worry that actions or behaviors associated with their anxiety will be negatively evaluated by others, leading them to feel embarrassed. This worry often causes people with social anxiety to avoid social situations. Social anxiety disorder can manifest in a range of situations, such as within the workplace or the school environment.Agoraphobia: People with agoraphobia have an intense fear of two or more of the following situations:People with agoraphobia often avoid these situations, in part, because they think being able to leave might be difficult or impossible in the event they have panic-like reactions or other embarrassing symptoms. In the most severe form of agoraphobia, an individual can become housebound.Separation anxiety disorder: Separation anxiety is often thought of as something that only children deal with; however, adults can also be diagnosed with separation anxiety disorder. People who have separation anxiety disorder have fears about being parted from people to whom they are attached. They often worry that some sort of harm or something untoward will happen to their attachment figures while they are separated. This fear leads them to avoid being separated from their attachment figures and to avoid being alone. People with separation anxiety may have nightmares about being separated from attachment figures or experience physical symptoms when separation occurs or is anticipated.Selective mutism: A somewhat rare disorder associated with anxiety is selective mutism. Selective mutism occurs when people fail to speak in specific social situations despite having normal language skills. Selective mutism usually occurs before the age of 5 and is often associated with extreme shyness, fear of social embarrassment, compulsive traits, withdrawal, clinging behavior, and temper tantrums. People diagnosed with selective mutism are often also diagnosed with other anxiety disorders.Researchers are finding that both genetic and environmental factors contribute to the risk of developing an anxiety disorder. Although the risk factors for each type of anxiety disorder can vary, some general risk factors for all types of anxiety disorders include:Anxiety disorders are generally treated with psychotherapy, medication, or both. There are many ways to treat anxiety and people should work with their doctor to choose the treatment that is best for them.Psychotherapy or “talk therapy” can help people with anxiety disorders. To be effective, psychotherapy must be directed at the person’s specific anxieties and tailored to his or her needs.Cognitive Behavioral TherapyCognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) is an example of one type of psychotherapy that can help people with anxiety disorders. It teaches people different ways of thinking, behaving, and reacting to anxiety-producing and fearful objects and situations. CBT can also help people learn and practice social skills, which is vital for treating social anxiety disorder.Cognitive therapy and exposure therapy are two CBT methods that are often used, together or by themselves, to treat social anxiety disorder. Cognitive therapy focuses on identifying, challenging, and then neutralizing unhelpful or distorted thoughts underlying anxiety disorders. Exposure therapy focuses on confronting the fears underlying an anxiety disorder to help people engage in activities they have been avoiding. Exposure therapy is sometimes used along with relaxation exercises and/or imagery.CBT can be conducted individually or with a group of people who have similar difficulties. Often “homework” is assigned for participants to complete between sessions.Medication does not cure anxiety disorders but can help relieve symptoms. Medication for anxiety is prescribed by doctors, such as a psychiatrist or primary care provider. Some states also allow psychologists who have received specialized training to prescribe psychiatric medications. The most common classes of medications used to combat anxiety disorders are anti-anxiety drugs (such as benzodiazepines), antidepressants, and beta-blockers.Anti-Anxiety MedicationsAnti-anxiety medications can help reduce the symptoms of anxiety, panic attacks, or extreme fear and worry. The most common anti-anxiety medications are called benzodiazepines. Although benzodiazepines are sometimes used as first-line treatments for generalized anxiety disorder, they have both benefits and drawbacks.Some benefits of benzodiazepines are that they are effective in relieving anxiety and take effect more quickly than antidepressant medications often prescribed for anxiety. Some drawbacks of benzodiazepines are that people can build up a tolerance to them if they are taken over a long period of time and they may need higher and higher doses to get the same effect. Some people may even become dependent on them.To avoid these problems, doctors usually prescribe benzodiazepines for short periods of time, a practice that is especially helpful for older adults, people who have substance abuse problems, and people who become dependent on medication easily.If people suddenly stop taking benzodiazepines, they may have withdrawal symptoms, or their anxiety may return. Therefore, benzodiazepines should be tapered off slowly. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose.For long-term use, benzodiazepines are often considered a second-line treatment for anxiety (with antidepressants being considered a first-line treatment) as well as an “as-needed” treatment for any distressing flare-ups of symptoms.A different type of anti-anxiety medication is buspirone. Buspirone is a non-benzodiazepine medication specifically indicated for the treatment of chronic anxiety, although it does not help everyone.AntidepressantsAntidepressants are used to treat depression, but they can also be helpful for treating anxiety disorders. They may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. You may need to try several different antidepressant medicines before finding the one that improves your symptoms and has manageable side effects. A medication that has helped you or a close family member in the past will often be considered.Antidepressants can take time to work, so it’s important to give the medication a chance before reaching a conclusion about its effectiveness. If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Antidepressants called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) are commonly used as first-line treatments for anxiety. Less-commonly used — but effective — treatments for anxiety disorders are older classes of antidepressants, such as tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs).Please Note: In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may experience an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressant medications, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. Because of this, patients of all ages taking antidepressants should be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.Beta-BlockersAlthough beta-blockers are most often used to treat high blood pressure, they can also be used to help relieve the physical symptoms of anxiety, such as rapid heartbeat, shaking, trembling, and blushing. These medications, when taken for a short period of time, can help people keep physical symptoms under control. They can also be used “as needed” to reduce acute anxiety, including as a preventive intervention for some predictable forms of performance anxieties.Choosing the Right MedicationSome types of drugs may work better for specific types of anxiety disorders, so people should work closely with their doctor to identify which medication is best for them. Certain substances such as caffeine, some over-the-counter cold medicines, illicit drugs, and herbal supplements may aggravate the symptoms of anxiety disorders or interact with prescribed medication. Patients should talk with their doctor, so they can learn which substances are safe and which to avoid.Choosing the right medication, medication dose, and treatment plan should be done under an expert’s care and should be based on a person’s needs and their medical situation. Your doctor may try several medicines before finding the right one.You and your doctor should discuss:For more information, please visit Mental Health Medications Health Topic webpage. Please note that any information on this website regarding medications is provided for educational purposes only and may be outdated. Diagnosis and treatment decisions should be made in consultation with your doctor. Information about medications changes frequently. Please visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website for the latest information on warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Some people with anxiety disorders might benefit from joining a self-help or support group and sharing their problems and achievements with others. Internet chat rooms might also be useful, but any advice received over the internet should be used with caution, as Internet acquaintances have usually never seen each other and what has helped one person is not necessarily what is best for another. You should always check with your doctor before following any treatment advice found on the internet. Talking with a trusted friend or member of the clergy can also provide support, but it is not necessarily a sufficient alternative to care from a doctor or other health professional.Stress management techniques and meditation can help people with anxiety disorders calm themselves and may enhance the effects of therapy. Research suggests that aerobic exercise can help some people manage their anxiety; however, exercise should not take the place of standard care and more research is needed.Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including anxiety disorders. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, new psychotherapies, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe.Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future. Decisions about whether to apply for a clinical trial and which ones are best suited for a given individual are best made in collaboration with a licensed health professional.To learn more about clinical trials, please visit the NIH Clinical Research Trials and You website. To find a clinical trial, visit ClinicalTrials.gov.Last Revised: July 2018 Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreThis brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).This brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a chronic disorder in which a person has uncontrollable, reoccurring thoughts and behaviors.This brochure discusses symptoms, causes, and treatments for panic disorder, a type of anxiety disorder associated with sudden and repeated attacks of fear.More Publications About Anxiety DisordersThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuOccasional anxiety is an expected part of life. You might feel anxious when faced with a problem at work, before taking a test, or before making an important decision. But anxiety disorders involve more than temporary worry or fear. For a person with an anxiety disorder, the anxiety does not go away and can get worse over time. The symptoms can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, school work, and relationships.There are several types of anxiety disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and various phobia-related disorders.People with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) display excessive anxiety or worry, most days for at least 6 months, about a number of things such as personal health, work, social interactions, and everyday routine life circumstances. The fear and anxiety can cause significant problems in areas of their life, such as social interactions, school, and work.Generalized anxiety disorder symptoms include:People with panic disorder have recurrent unexpected panic attacks. Panic attacks are sudden periods of intense fear that come on quickly and reach their peak within minutes. Attacks can occur unexpectedly or can be brought on by a trigger, such as a feared object or situation.During a panic attack, people may experience:People with panic disorder often worry about when the next attack will happen and actively try to prevent future attacks by avoiding places, situations, or behaviors they associate with panic attacks. Worry about panic attacks, and the effort spent trying to avoid attacks, cause significant problems in various areas of the person’s life, including the development of agoraphobia (see below).A phobia is an intense fear of—or aversion to—specific objects or situations. Although it can be realistic to be anxious in some circumstances, the fear people with phobias feel is out of proportion to the actual danger caused by the situation or object.People with a phobia:There are several types of phobias and phobia-related disorders:Specific Phobias (sometimes called simple phobias): As the name suggests, people who have a specific phobia have an intense fear of, or feel intense anxiety about, specific types of objects or situations. Some examples of specific phobias include the fear of:Social anxiety disorder (previously called social phobia): People with social anxiety disorder have a general intense fear of, or anxiety toward, social or performance situations. They worry that actions or behaviors associated with their anxiety will be negatively evaluated by others, leading them to feel embarrassed. This worry often causes people with social anxiety to avoid social situations. Social anxiety disorder can manifest in a range of situations, such as within the workplace or the school environment.Agoraphobia: People with agoraphobia have an intense fear of two or more of the following situations:People with agoraphobia often avoid these situations, in part, because they think being able to leave might be difficult or impossible in the event they have panic-like reactions or other embarrassing symptoms. In the most severe form of agoraphobia, an individual can become housebound.Separation anxiety disorder: Separation anxiety is often thought of as something that only children deal with; however, adults can also be diagnosed with separation anxiety disorder. People who have separation anxiety disorder have fears about being parted from people to whom they are attached. They often worry that some sort of harm or something untoward will happen to their attachment figures while they are separated. This fear leads them to avoid being separated from their attachment figures and to avoid being alone. People with separation anxiety may have nightmares about being separated from attachment figures or experience physical symptoms when separation occurs or is anticipated.Selective mutism: A somewhat rare disorder associated with anxiety is selective mutism. Selective mutism occurs when people fail to speak in specific social situations despite having normal language skills. Selective mutism usually occurs before the age of 5 and is often associated with extreme shyness, fear of social embarrassment, compulsive traits, withdrawal, clinging behavior, and temper tantrums. People diagnosed with selective mutism are often also diagnosed with other anxiety disorders.Researchers are finding that both genetic and environmental factors contribute to the risk of developing an anxiety disorder. Although the risk factors for each type of anxiety disorder can vary, some general risk factors for all types of anxiety disorders include:Anxiety disorders are generally treated with psychotherapy, medication, or both. There are many ways to treat anxiety and people should work with their doctor to choose the treatment that is best for them.Psychotherapy or “talk therapy” can help people with anxiety disorders. To be effective, psychotherapy must be directed at the person’s specific anxieties and tailored to his or her needs.Cognitive Behavioral TherapyCognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) is an example of one type of psychotherapy that can help people with anxiety disorders. It teaches people different ways of thinking, behaving, and reacting to anxiety-producing and fearful objects and situations. CBT can also help people learn and practice social skills, which is vital for treating social anxiety disorder.Cognitive therapy and exposure therapy are two CBT methods that are often used, together or by themselves, to treat social anxiety disorder. Cognitive therapy focuses on identifying, challenging, and then neutralizing unhelpful or distorted thoughts underlying anxiety disorders. Exposure therapy focuses on confronting the fears underlying an anxiety disorder to help people engage in activities they have been avoiding. Exposure therapy is sometimes used along with relaxation exercises and/or imagery.CBT can be conducted individually or with a group of people who have similar difficulties. Often “homework” is assigned for participants to complete between sessions.Medication does not cure anxiety disorders but can help relieve symptoms. Medication for anxiety is prescribed by doctors, such as a psychiatrist or primary care provider. Some states also allow psychologists who have received specialized training to prescribe psychiatric medications. The most common classes of medications used to combat anxiety disorders are anti-anxiety drugs (such as benzodiazepines), antidepressants, and beta-blockers.Anti-Anxiety MedicationsAnti-anxiety medications can help reduce the symptoms of anxiety, panic attacks, or extreme fear and worry. The most common anti-anxiety medications are called benzodiazepines. Although benzodiazepines are sometimes used as first-line treatments for generalized anxiety disorder, they have both benefits and drawbacks.Some benefits of benzodiazepines are that they are effective in relieving anxiety and take effect more quickly than antidepressant medications often prescribed for anxiety. Some drawbacks of benzodiazepines are that people can build up a tolerance to them if they are taken over a long period of time and they may need higher and higher doses to get the same effect. Some people may even become dependent on them.To avoid these problems, doctors usually prescribe benzodiazepines for short periods of time, a practice that is especially helpful for older adults, people who have substance abuse problems, and people who become dependent on medication easily.If people suddenly stop taking benzodiazepines, they may have withdrawal symptoms, or their anxiety may return. Therefore, benzodiazepines should be tapered off slowly. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose.For long-term use, benzodiazepines are often considered a second-line treatment for anxiety (with antidepressants being considered a first-line treatment) as well as an “as-needed” treatment for any distressing flare-ups of symptoms.A different type of anti-anxiety medication is buspirone. Buspirone is a non-benzodiazepine medication specifically indicated for the treatment of chronic anxiety, although it does not help everyone.AntidepressantsAntidepressants are used to treat depression, but they can also be helpful for treating anxiety disorders. They may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. You may need to try several different antidepressant medicines before finding the one that improves your symptoms and has manageable side effects. A medication that has helped you or a close family member in the past will often be considered.Antidepressants can take time to work, so it’s important to give the medication a chance before reaching a conclusion about its effectiveness. If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Antidepressants called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) are commonly used as first-line treatments for anxiety. Less-commonly used — but effective — treatments for anxiety disorders are older classes of antidepressants, such as tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs).Please Note: In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may experience an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressant medications, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. Because of this, patients of all ages taking antidepressants should be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.Beta-BlockersAlthough beta-blockers are most often used to treat high blood pressure, they can also be used to help relieve the physical symptoms of anxiety, such as rapid heartbeat, shaking, trembling, and blushing. These medications, when taken for a short period of time, can help people keep physical symptoms under control. They can also be used “as needed” to reduce acute anxiety, including as a preventive intervention for some predictable forms of performance anxieties.Choosing the Right MedicationSome types of drugs may work better for specific types of anxiety disorders, so people should work closely with their doctor to identify which medication is best for them. Certain substances such as caffeine, some over-the-counter cold medicines, illicit drugs, and herbal supplements may aggravate the symptoms of anxiety disorders or interact with prescribed medication. Patients should talk with their doctor, so they can learn which substances are safe and which to avoid.Choosing the right medication, medication dose, and treatment plan should be done under an expert’s care and should be based on a person’s needs and their medical situation. Your doctor may try several medicines before finding the right one.You and your doctor should discuss:For more information, please visit Mental Health Medications Health Topic webpage. Please note that any information on this website regarding medications is provided for educational purposes only and may be outdated. Diagnosis and treatment decisions should be made in consultation with your doctor. Information about medications changes frequently. Please visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website for the latest information on warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Some people with anxiety disorders might benefit from joining a self-help or support group and sharing their problems and achievements with others. Internet chat rooms might also be useful, but any advice received over the internet should be used with caution, as Internet acquaintances have usually never seen each other and what has helped one person is not necessarily what is best for another. You should always check with your doctor before following any treatment advice found on the internet. Talking with a trusted friend or member of the clergy can also provide support, but it is not necessarily a sufficient alternative to care from a doctor or other health professional.Stress management techniques and meditation can help people with anxiety disorders calm themselves and may enhance the effects of therapy. Research suggests that aerobic exercise can help some people manage their anxiety; however, exercise should not take the place of standard care and more research is needed.Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including anxiety disorders. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, new psychotherapies, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe.Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future. Decisions about whether to apply for a clinical trial and which ones are best suited for a given individual are best made in collaboration with a licensed health professional.To learn more about clinical trials, please visit the NIH Clinical Research Trials and You website. To find a clinical trial, visit ClinicalTrials.gov.Last Revised: July 2018 Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreThis brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).This brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a chronic disorder in which a person has uncontrollable, reoccurring thoughts and behaviors.This brochure discusses symptoms, causes, and treatments for panic disorder, a type of anxiety disorder associated with sudden and repeated attacks of fear.More Publications About Anxiety DisordersThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuOccasional anxiety is an expected part of life. You might feel anxious when faced with a problem at work, before taking a test, or before making an important decision. But anxiety disorders involve more than temporary worry or fear. For a person with an anxiety disorder, the anxiety does not go away and can get worse over time. The symptoms can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, school work, and relationships.There are several types of anxiety disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and various phobia-related disorders.People with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) display excessive anxiety or worry, most days for at least 6 months, about a number of things such as personal health, work, social interactions, and everyday routine life circumstances. The fear and anxiety can cause significant problems in areas of their life, such as social interactions, school, and work.Generalized anxiety disorder symptoms include:People with panic disorder have recurrent unexpected panic attacks. Panic attacks are sudden periods of intense fear that come on quickly and reach their peak within minutes. Attacks can occur unexpectedly or can be brought on by a trigger, such as a feared object or situation.During a panic attack, people may experience:People with panic disorder often worry about when the next attack will happen and actively try to prevent future attacks by avoiding places, situations, or behaviors they associate with panic attacks. Worry about panic attacks, and the effort spent trying to avoid attacks, cause significant problems in various areas of the person’s life, including the development of agoraphobia (see below).A phobia is an intense fear of—or aversion to—specific objects or situations. Although it can be realistic to be anxious in some circumstances, the fear people with phobias feel is out of proportion to the actual danger caused by the situation or object.People with a phobia:There are several types of phobias and phobia-related disorders:Specific Phobias (sometimes called simple phobias): As the name suggests, people who have a specific phobia have an intense fear of, or feel intense anxiety about, specific types of objects or situations. Some examples of specific phobias include the fear of:Social anxiety disorder (previously called social phobia): People with social anxiety disorder have a general intense fear of, or anxiety toward, social or performance situations. They worry that actions or behaviors associated with their anxiety will be negatively evaluated by others, leading them to feel embarrassed. This worry often causes people with social anxiety to avoid social situations. Social anxiety disorder can manifest in a range of situations, such as within the workplace or the school environment.Agoraphobia: People with agoraphobia have an intense fear of two or more of the following situations:People with agoraphobia often avoid these situations, in part, because they think being able to leave might be difficult or impossible in the event they have panic-like reactions or other embarrassing symptoms. In the most severe form of agoraphobia, an individual can become housebound.Separation anxiety disorder: Separation anxiety is often thought of as something that only children deal with; however, adults can also be diagnosed with separation anxiety disorder. People who have separation anxiety disorder have fears about being parted from people to whom they are attached. They often worry that some sort of harm or something untoward will happen to their attachment figures while they are separated. This fear leads them to avoid being separated from their attachment figures and to avoid being alone. People with separation anxiety may have nightmares about being separated from attachment figures or experience physical symptoms when separation occurs or is anticipated.Selective mutism: A somewhat rare disorder associated with anxiety is selective mutism. Selective mutism occurs when people fail to speak in specific social situations despite having normal language skills. Selective mutism usually occurs before the age of 5 and is often associated with extreme shyness, fear of social embarrassment, compulsive traits, withdrawal, clinging behavior, and temper tantrums. People diagnosed with selective mutism are often also diagnosed with other anxiety disorders.Researchers are finding that both genetic and environmental factors contribute to the risk of developing an anxiety disorder. Although the risk factors for each type of anxiety disorder can vary, some general risk factors for all types of anxiety disorders include:Anxiety disorders are generally treated with psychotherapy, medication, or both. There are many ways to treat anxiety and people should work with their doctor to choose the treatment that is best for them.Psychotherapy or “talk therapy” can help people with anxiety disorders. To be effective, psychotherapy must be directed at the person’s specific anxieties and tailored to his or her needs.Cognitive Behavioral TherapyCognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) is an example of one type of psychotherapy that can help people with anxiety disorders. It teaches people different ways of thinking, behaving, and reacting to anxiety-producing and fearful objects and situations. CBT can also help people learn and practice social skills, which is vital for treating social anxiety disorder.Cognitive therapy and exposure therapy are two CBT methods that are often used, together or by themselves, to treat social anxiety disorder. Cognitive therapy focuses on identifying, challenging, and then neutralizing unhelpful or distorted thoughts underlying anxiety disorders. Exposure therapy focuses on confronting the fears underlying an anxiety disorder to help people engage in activities they have been avoiding. Exposure therapy is sometimes used along with relaxation exercises and/or imagery.CBT can be conducted individually or with a group of people who have similar difficulties. Often “homework” is assigned for participants to complete between sessions.Medication does not cure anxiety disorders but can help relieve symptoms. Medication for anxiety is prescribed by doctors, such as a psychiatrist or primary care provider. Some states also allow psychologists who have received specialized training to prescribe psychiatric medications. The most common classes of medications used to combat anxiety disorders are anti-anxiety drugs (such as benzodiazepines), antidepressants, and beta-blockers.Anti-Anxiety MedicationsAnti-anxiety medications can help reduce the symptoms of anxiety, panic attacks, or extreme fear and worry. The most common anti-anxiety medications are called benzodiazepines. Although benzodiazepines are sometimes used as first-line treatments for generalized anxiety disorder, they have both benefits and drawbacks.Some benefits of benzodiazepines are that they are effective in relieving anxiety and take effect more quickly than antidepressant medications often prescribed for anxiety. Some drawbacks of benzodiazepines are that people can build up a tolerance to them if they are taken over a long period of time and they may need higher and higher doses to get the same effect. Some people may even become dependent on them.To avoid these problems, doctors usually prescribe benzodiazepines for short periods of time, a practice that is especially helpful for older adults, people who have substance abuse problems, and people who become dependent on medication easily.If people suddenly stop taking benzodiazepines, they may have withdrawal symptoms, or their anxiety may return. Therefore, benzodiazepines should be tapered off slowly. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose.For long-term use, benzodiazepines are often considered a second-line treatment for anxiety (with antidepressants being considered a first-line treatment) as well as an “as-needed” treatment for any distressing flare-ups of symptoms.A different type of anti-anxiety medication is buspirone. Buspirone is a non-benzodiazepine medication specifically indicated for the treatment of chronic anxiety, although it does not help everyone.AntidepressantsAntidepressants are used to treat depression, but they can also be helpful for treating anxiety disorders. They may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. You may need to try several different antidepressant medicines before finding the one that improves your symptoms and has manageable side effects. A medication that has helped you or a close family member in the past will often be considered.Antidepressants can take time to work, so it’s important to give the medication a chance before reaching a conclusion about its effectiveness. If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Antidepressants called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) are commonly used as first-line treatments for anxiety. Less-commonly used — but effective — treatments for anxiety disorders are older classes of antidepressants, such as tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs).Please Note: In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may experience an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressant medications, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. Because of this, patients of all ages taking antidepressants should be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.Beta-BlockersAlthough beta-blockers are most often used to treat high blood pressure, they can also be used to help relieve the physical symptoms of anxiety, such as rapid heartbeat, shaking, trembling, and blushing. These medications, when taken for a short period of time, can help people keep physical symptoms under control. They can also be used “as needed” to reduce acute anxiety, including as a preventive intervention for some predictable forms of performance anxieties.Choosing the Right MedicationSome types of drugs may work better for specific types of anxiety disorders, so people should work closely with their doctor to identify which medication is best for them. Certain substances such as caffeine, some over-the-counter cold medicines, illicit drugs, and herbal supplements may aggravate the symptoms of anxiety disorders or interact with prescribed medication. Patients should talk with their doctor, so they can learn which substances are safe and which to avoid.Choosing the right medication, medication dose, and treatment plan should be done under an expert’s care and should be based on a person’s needs and their medical situation. Your doctor may try several medicines before finding the right one.You and your doctor should discuss:For more information, please visit Mental Health Medications Health Topic webpage. Please note that any information on this website regarding medications is provided for educational purposes only and may be outdated. Diagnosis and treatment decisions should be made in consultation with your doctor. Information about medications changes frequently. Please visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website for the latest information on warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Some people with anxiety disorders might benefit from joining a self-help or support group and sharing their problems and achievements with others. Internet chat rooms might also be useful, but any advice received over the internet should be used with caution, as Internet acquaintances have usually never seen each other and what has helped one person is not necessarily what is best for another. You should always check with your doctor before following any treatment advice found on the internet. Talking with a trusted friend or member of the clergy can also provide support, but it is not necessarily a sufficient alternative to care from a doctor or other health professional.Stress management techniques and meditation can help people with anxiety disorders calm themselves and may enhance the effects of therapy. Research suggests that aerobic exercise can help some people manage their anxiety; however, exercise should not take the place of standard care and more research is needed.Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including anxiety disorders. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, new psychotherapies, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe.Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future. Decisions about whether to apply for a clinical trial and which ones are best suited for a given individual are best made in collaboration with a licensed health professional.To learn more about clinical trials, please visit the NIH Clinical Research Trials and You website. To find a clinical trial, visit ClinicalTrials.gov.Last Revised: July 2018 Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreThis brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).This brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a chronic disorder in which a person has uncontrollable, reoccurring thoughts and behaviors.This brochure discusses symptoms, causes, and treatments for panic disorder, a type of anxiety disorder associated with sudden and repeated attacks of fear.More Publications About Anxiety DisordersThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuOccasional anxiety is an expected part of life. You might feel anxious when faced with a problem at work, before taking a test, or before making an important decision. But anxiety disorders involve more than temporary worry or fear. For a person with an anxiety disorder, the anxiety does not go away and can get worse over time. The symptoms can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, school work, and relationships.There are several types of anxiety disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and various phobia-related disorders.People with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) display excessive anxiety or worry, most days for at least 6 months, about a number of things such as personal health, work, social interactions, and everyday routine life circumstances. The fear and anxiety can cause significant problems in areas of their life, such as social interactions, school, and work.Generalized anxiety disorder symptoms include:People with panic disorder have recurrent unexpected panic attacks. Panic attacks are sudden periods of intense fear that come on quickly and reach their peak within minutes. Attacks can occur unexpectedly or can be brought on by a trigger, such as a feared object or situation.During a panic attack, people may experience:People with panic disorder often worry about when the next attack will happen and actively try to prevent future attacks by avoiding places, situations, or behaviors they associate with panic attacks. Worry about panic attacks, and the effort spent trying to avoid attacks, cause significant problems in various areas of the person’s life, including the development of agoraphobia (see below).A phobia is an intense fear of—or aversion to—specific objects or situations. Although it can be realistic to be anxious in some circumstances, the fear people with phobias feel is out of proportion to the actual danger caused by the situation or object.People with a phobia:There are several types of phobias and phobia-related disorders:Specific Phobias (sometimes called simple phobias): As the name suggests, people who have a specific phobia have an intense fear of, or feel intense anxiety about, specific types of objects or situations. Some examples of specific phobias include the fear of:Social anxiety disorder (previously called social phobia): People with social anxiety disorder have a general intense fear of, or anxiety toward, social or performance situations. They worry that actions or behaviors associated with their anxiety will be negatively evaluated by others, leading them to feel embarrassed. This worry often causes people with social anxiety to avoid social situations. Social anxiety disorder can manifest in a range of situations, such as within the workplace or the school environment.Agoraphobia: People with agoraphobia have an intense fear of two or more of the following situations:People with agoraphobia often avoid these situations, in part, because they think being able to leave might be difficult or impossible in the event they have panic-like reactions or other embarrassing symptoms. In the most severe form of agoraphobia, an individual can become housebound.Separation anxiety disorder: Separation anxiety is often thought of as something that only children deal with; however, adults can also be diagnosed with separation anxiety disorder. People who have separation anxiety disorder have fears about being parted from people to whom they are attached. They often worry that some sort of harm or something untoward will happen to their attachment figures while they are separated. This fear leads them to avoid being separated from their attachment figures and to avoid being alone. People with separation anxiety may have nightmares about being separated from attachment figures or experience physical symptoms when separation occurs or is anticipated.Selective mutism: A somewhat rare disorder associated with anxiety is selective mutism. Selective mutism occurs when people fail to speak in specific social situations despite having normal language skills. Selective mutism usually occurs before the age of 5 and is often associated with extreme shyness, fear of social embarrassment, compulsive traits, withdrawal, clinging behavior, and temper tantrums. People diagnosed with selective mutism are often also diagnosed with other anxiety disorders.Researchers are finding that both genetic and environmental factors contribute to the risk of developing an anxiety disorder. Although the risk factors for each type of anxiety disorder can vary, some general risk factors for all types of anxiety disorders include:Anxiety disorders are generally treated with psychotherapy, medication, or both. There are many ways to treat anxiety and people should work with their doctor to choose the treatment that is best for them.Psychotherapy or “talk therapy” can help people with anxiety disorders. To be effective, psychotherapy must be directed at the person’s specific anxieties and tailored to his or her needs.Cognitive Behavioral TherapyCognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) is an example of one type of psychotherapy that can help people with anxiety disorders. It teaches people different ways of thinking, behaving, and reacting to anxiety-producing and fearful objects and situations. CBT can also help people learn and practice social skills, which is vital for treating social anxiety disorder.Cognitive therapy and exposure therapy are two CBT methods that are often used, together or by themselves, to treat social anxiety disorder. Cognitive therapy focuses on identifying, challenging, and then neutralizing unhelpful or distorted thoughts underlying anxiety disorders. Exposure therapy focuses on confronting the fears underlying an anxiety disorder to help people engage in activities they have been avoiding. Exposure therapy is sometimes used along with relaxation exercises and/or imagery.CBT can be conducted individually or with a group of people who have similar difficulties. Often “homework” is assigned for participants to complete between sessions.Medication does not cure anxiety disorders but can help relieve symptoms. Medication for anxiety is prescribed by doctors, such as a psychiatrist or primary care provider. Some states also allow psychologists who have received specialized training to prescribe psychiatric medications. The most common classes of medications used to combat anxiety disorders are anti-anxiety drugs (such as benzodiazepines), antidepressants, and beta-blockers.Anti-Anxiety MedicationsAnti-anxiety medications can help reduce the symptoms of anxiety, panic attacks, or extreme fear and worry. The most common anti-anxiety medications are called benzodiazepines. Although benzodiazepines are sometimes used as first-line treatments for generalized anxiety disorder, they have both benefits and drawbacks.Some benefits of benzodiazepines are that they are effective in relieving anxiety and take effect more quickly than antidepressant medications often prescribed for anxiety. Some drawbacks of benzodiazepines are that people can build up a tolerance to them if they are taken over a long period of time and they may need higher and higher doses to get the same effect. Some people may even become dependent on them.To avoid these problems, doctors usually prescribe benzodiazepines for short periods of time, a practice that is especially helpful for older adults, people who have substance abuse problems, and people who become dependent on medication easily.If people suddenly stop taking benzodiazepines, they may have withdrawal symptoms, or their anxiety may return. Therefore, benzodiazepines should be tapered off slowly. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose.For long-term use, benzodiazepines are often considered a second-line treatment for anxiety (with antidepressants being considered a first-line treatment) as well as an “as-needed” treatment for any distressing flare-ups of symptoms.A different type of anti-anxiety medication is buspirone. Buspirone is a non-benzodiazepine medication specifically indicated for the treatment of chronic anxiety, although it does not help everyone.AntidepressantsAntidepressants are used to treat depression, but they can also be helpful for treating anxiety disorders. They may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. You may need to try several different antidepressant medicines before finding the one that improves your symptoms and has manageable side effects. A medication that has helped you or a close family member in the past will often be considered.Antidepressants can take time to work, so it’s important to give the medication a chance before reaching a conclusion about its effectiveness. If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Antidepressants called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) are commonly used as first-line treatments for anxiety. Less-commonly used — but effective — treatments for anxiety disorders are older classes of antidepressants, such as tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs).Please Note: In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may experience an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressant medications, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. Because of this, patients of all ages taking antidepressants should be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.Beta-BlockersAlthough beta-blockers are most often used to treat high blood pressure, they can also be used to help relieve the physical symptoms of anxiety, such as rapid heartbeat, shaking, trembling, and blushing. These medications, when taken for a short period of time, can help people keep physical symptoms under control. They can also be used “as needed” to reduce acute anxiety, including as a preventive intervention for some predictable forms of performance anxieties.Choosing the Right MedicationSome types of drugs may work better for specific types of anxiety disorders, so people should work closely with their doctor to identify which medication is best for them. Certain substances such as caffeine, some over-the-counter cold medicines, illicit drugs, and herbal supplements may aggravate the symptoms of anxiety disorders or interact with prescribed medication. Patients should talk with their doctor, so they can learn which substances are safe and which to avoid.Choosing the right medication, medication dose, and treatment plan should be done under an expert’s care and should be based on a person’s needs and their medical situation. Your doctor may try several medicines before finding the right one.You and your doctor should discuss:For more information, please visit Mental Health Medications Health Topic webpage. Please note that any information on this website regarding medications is provided for educational purposes only and may be outdated. Diagnosis and treatment decisions should be made in consultation with your doctor. Information about medications changes frequently. Please visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website for the latest information on warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Some people with anxiety disorders might benefit from joining a self-help or support group and sharing their problems and achievements with others. Internet chat rooms might also be useful, but any advice received over the internet should be used with caution, as Internet acquaintances have usually never seen each other and what has helped one person is not necessarily what is best for another. You should always check with your doctor before following any treatment advice found on the internet. Talking with a trusted friend or member of the clergy can also provide support, but it is not necessarily a sufficient alternative to care from a doctor or other health professional.Stress management techniques and meditation can help people with anxiety disorders calm themselves and may enhance the effects of therapy. Research suggests that aerobic exercise can help some people manage their anxiety; however, exercise should not take the place of standard care and more research is needed.Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including anxiety disorders. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, new psychotherapies, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe.Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future. Decisions about whether to apply for a clinical trial and which ones are best suited for a given individual are best made in collaboration with a licensed health professional.To learn more about clinical trials, please visit the NIH Clinical Research Trials and You website. To find a clinical trial, visit ClinicalTrials.gov.Last Revised: July 2018 Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreThis brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).This brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a chronic disorder in which a person has uncontrollable, reoccurring thoughts and behaviors.This brochure discusses symptoms, causes, and treatments for panic disorder, a type of anxiety disorder associated with sudden and repeated attacks of fear.More Publications About Anxiety DisordersThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuOccasional anxiety is an expected part of life. You might feel anxious when faced with a problem at work, before taking a test, or before making an important decision. But anxiety disorders involve more than temporary worry or fear. For a person with an anxiety disorder, the anxiety does not go away and can get worse over time. The symptoms can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, school work, and relationships.There are several types of anxiety disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and various phobia-related disorders.People with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) display excessive anxiety or worry, most days for at least 6 months, about a number of things such as personal health, work, social interactions, and everyday routine life circumstances. The fear and anxiety can cause significant problems in areas of their life, such as social interactions, school, and work.Generalized anxiety disorder symptoms include:People with panic disorder have recurrent unexpected panic attacks. Panic attacks are sudden periods of intense fear that come on quickly and reach their peak within minutes. Attacks can occur unexpectedly or can be brought on by a trigger, such as a feared object or situation.During a panic attack, people may experience:People with panic disorder often worry about when the next attack will happen and actively try to prevent future attacks by avoiding places, situations, or behaviors they associate with panic attacks. Worry about panic attacks, and the effort spent trying to avoid attacks, cause significant problems in various areas of the person’s life, including the development of agoraphobia (see below).A phobia is an intense fear of—or aversion to—specific objects or situations. Although it can be realistic to be anxious in some circumstances, the fear people with phobias feel is out of proportion to the actual danger caused by the situation or object.People with a phobia:There are several types of phobias and phobia-related disorders:Specific Phobias (sometimes called simple phobias): As the name suggests, people who have a specific phobia have an intense fear of, or feel intense anxiety about, specific types of objects or situations. Some examples of specific phobias include the fear of:Social anxiety disorder (previously called social phobia): People with social anxiety disorder have a general intense fear of, or anxiety toward, social or performance situations. They worry that actions or behaviors associated with their anxiety will be negatively evaluated by others, leading them to feel embarrassed. This worry often causes people with social anxiety to avoid social situations. Social anxiety disorder can manifest in a range of situations, such as within the workplace or the school environment.Agoraphobia: People with agoraphobia have an intense fear of two or more of the following situations:People with agoraphobia often avoid these situations, in part, because they think being able to leave might be difficult or impossible in the event they have panic-like reactions or other embarrassing symptoms. In the most severe form of agoraphobia, an individual can become housebound.Separation anxiety disorder: Separation anxiety is often thought of as something that only children deal with; however, adults can also be diagnosed with separation anxiety disorder. People who have separation anxiety disorder have fears about being parted from people to whom they are attached. They often worry that some sort of harm or something untoward will happen to their attachment figures while they are separated. This fear leads them to avoid being separated from their attachment figures and to avoid being alone. People with separation anxiety may have nightmares about being separated from attachment figures or experience physical symptoms when separation occurs or is anticipated.Selective mutism: A somewhat rare disorder associated with anxiety is selective mutism. Selective mutism occurs when people fail to speak in specific social situations despite having normal language skills. Selective mutism usually occurs before the age of 5 and is often associated with extreme shyness, fear of social embarrassment, compulsive traits, withdrawal, clinging behavior, and temper tantrums. People diagnosed with selective mutism are often also diagnosed with other anxiety disorders.Researchers are finding that both genetic and environmental factors contribute to the risk of developing an anxiety disorder. Although the risk factors for each type of anxiety disorder can vary, some general risk factors for all types of anxiety disorders include:Anxiety disorders are generally treated with psychotherapy, medication, or both. There are many ways to treat anxiety and people should work with their doctor to choose the treatment that is best for them.Psychotherapy or “talk therapy” can help people with anxiety disorders. To be effective, psychotherapy must be directed at the person’s specific anxieties and tailored to his or her needs.Cognitive Behavioral TherapyCognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) is an example of one type of psychotherapy that can help people with anxiety disorders. It teaches people different ways of thinking, behaving, and reacting to anxiety-producing and fearful objects and situations. CBT can also help people learn and practice social skills, which is vital for treating social anxiety disorder.Cognitive therapy and exposure therapy are two CBT methods that are often used, together or by themselves, to treat social anxiety disorder. Cognitive therapy focuses on identifying, challenging, and then neutralizing unhelpful or distorted thoughts underlying anxiety disorders. Exposure therapy focuses on confronting the fears underlying an anxiety disorder to help people engage in activities they have been avoiding. Exposure therapy is sometimes used along with relaxation exercises and/or imagery.CBT can be conducted individually or with a group of people who have similar difficulties. Often “homework” is assigned for participants to complete between sessions.Medication does not cure anxiety disorders but can help relieve symptoms. Medication for anxiety is prescribed by doctors, such as a psychiatrist or primary care provider. Some states also allow psychologists who have received specialized training to prescribe psychiatric medications. The most common classes of medications used to combat anxiety disorders are anti-anxiety drugs (such as benzodiazepines), antidepressants, and beta-blockers.Anti-Anxiety MedicationsAnti-anxiety medications can help reduce the symptoms of anxiety, panic attacks, or extreme fear and worry. The most common anti-anxiety medications are called benzodiazepines. Although benzodiazepines are sometimes used as first-line treatments for generalized anxiety disorder, they have both benefits and drawbacks.Some benefits of benzodiazepines are that they are effective in relieving anxiety and take effect more quickly than antidepressant medications often prescribed for anxiety. Some drawbacks of benzodiazepines are that people can build up a tolerance to them if they are taken over a long period of time and they may need higher and higher doses to get the same effect. Some people may even become dependent on them.To avoid these problems, doctors usually prescribe benzodiazepines for short periods of time, a practice that is especially helpful for older adults, people who have substance abuse problems, and people who become dependent on medication easily.If people suddenly stop taking benzodiazepines, they may have withdrawal symptoms, or their anxiety may return. Therefore, benzodiazepines should be tapered off slowly. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose.For long-term use, benzodiazepines are often considered a second-line treatment for anxiety (with antidepressants being considered a first-line treatment) as well as an “as-needed” treatment for any distressing flare-ups of symptoms.A different type of anti-anxiety medication is buspirone. Buspirone is a non-benzodiazepine medication specifically indicated for the treatment of chronic anxiety, although it does not help everyone.AntidepressantsAntidepressants are used to treat depression, but they can also be helpful for treating anxiety disorders. They may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. You may need to try several different antidepressant medicines before finding the one that improves your symptoms and has manageable side effects. A medication that has helped you or a close family member in the past will often be considered.Antidepressants can take time to work, so it’s important to give the medication a chance before reaching a conclusion about its effectiveness. If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Antidepressants called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) are commonly used as first-line treatments for anxiety. Less-commonly used — but effective — treatments for anxiety disorders are older classes of antidepressants, such as tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs).Please Note: In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may experience an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressant medications, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. Because of this, patients of all ages taking antidepressants should be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.Beta-BlockersAlthough beta-blockers are most often used to treat high blood pressure, they can also be used to help relieve the physical symptoms of anxiety, such as rapid heartbeat, shaking, trembling, and blushing. These medications, when taken for a short period of time, can help people keep physical symptoms under control. They can also be used “as needed” to reduce acute anxiety, including as a preventive intervention for some predictable forms of performance anxieties.Choosing the Right MedicationSome types of drugs may work better for specific types of anxiety disorders, so people should work closely with their doctor to identify which medication is best for them. Certain substances such as caffeine, some over-the-counter cold medicines, illicit drugs, and herbal supplements may aggravate the symptoms of anxiety disorders or interact with prescribed medication. Patients should talk with their doctor, so they can learn which substances are safe and which to avoid.Choosing the right medication, medication dose, and treatment plan should be done under an expert’s care and should be based on a person’s needs and their medical situation. Your doctor may try several medicines before finding the right one.You and your doctor should discuss:For more information, please visit Mental Health Medications Health Topic webpage. Please note that any information on this website regarding medications is provided for educational purposes only and may be outdated. Diagnosis and treatment decisions should be made in consultation with your doctor. Information about medications changes frequently. Please visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website for the latest information on warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Some people with anxiety disorders might benefit from joining a self-help or support group and sharing their problems and achievements with others. Internet chat rooms might also be useful, but any advice received over the internet should be used with caution, as Internet acquaintances have usually never seen each other and what has helped one person is not necessarily what is best for another. You should always check with your doctor before following any treatment advice found on the internet. Talking with a trusted friend or member of the clergy can also provide support, but it is not necessarily a sufficient alternative to care from a doctor or other health professional.Stress management techniques and meditation can help people with anxiety disorders calm themselves and may enhance the effects of therapy. Research suggests that aerobic exercise can help some people manage their anxiety; however, exercise should not take the place of standard care and more research is needed.Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including anxiety disorders. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, new psychotherapies, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe.Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future. Decisions about whether to apply for a clinical trial and which ones are best suited for a given individual are best made in collaboration with a licensed health professional.To learn more about clinical trials, please visit the NIH Clinical Research Trials and You website. To find a clinical trial, visit ClinicalTrials.gov.Last Revised: July 2018 Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreThis brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).This brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a chronic disorder in which a person has uncontrollable, reoccurring thoughts and behaviors.This brochure discusses symptoms, causes, and treatments for panic disorder, a type of anxiety disorder associated with sudden and repeated attacks of fear.More Publications About Anxiety DisordersThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuOccasional anxiety is an expected part of life. You might feel anxious when faced with a problem at work, before taking a test, or before making an important decision. But anxiety disorders involve more than temporary worry or fear. For a person with an anxiety disorder, the anxiety does not go away and can get worse over time. The symptoms can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, school work, and relationships.There are several types of anxiety disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and various phobia-related disorders.People with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) display excessive anxiety or worry, most days for at least 6 months, about a number of things such as personal health, work, social interactions, and everyday routine life circumstances. The fear and anxiety can cause significant problems in areas of their life, such as social interactions, school, and work.Generalized anxiety disorder symptoms include:People with panic disorder have recurrent unexpected panic attacks. Panic attacks are sudden periods of intense fear that come on quickly and reach their peak within minutes. Attacks can occur unexpectedly or can be brought on by a trigger, such as a feared object or situation.During a panic attack, people may experience:People with panic disorder often worry about when the next attack will happen and actively try to prevent future attacks by avoiding places, situations, or behaviors they associate with panic attacks. Worry about panic attacks, and the effort spent trying to avoid attacks, cause significant problems in various areas of the person’s life, including the development of agoraphobia (see below).A phobia is an intense fear of—or aversion to—specific objects or situations. Although it can be realistic to be anxious in some circumstances, the fear people with phobias feel is out of proportion to the actual danger caused by the situation or object.People with a phobia:There are several types of phobias and phobia-related disorders:Specific Phobias (sometimes called simple phobias): As the name suggests, people who have a specific phobia have an intense fear of, or feel intense anxiety about, specific types of objects or situations. Some examples of specific phobias include the fear of:Social anxiety disorder (previously called social phobia): People with social anxiety disorder have a general intense fear of, or anxiety toward, social or performance situations. They worry that actions or behaviors associated with their anxiety will be negatively evaluated by others, leading them to feel embarrassed. This worry often causes people with social anxiety to avoid social situations. Social anxiety disorder can manifest in a range of situations, such as within the workplace or the school environment.Agoraphobia: People with agoraphobia have an intense fear of two or more of the following situations:People with agoraphobia often avoid these situations, in part, because they think being able to leave might be difficult or impossible in the event they have panic-like reactions or other embarrassing symptoms. In the most severe form of agoraphobia, an individual can become housebound.Separation anxiety disorder: Separation anxiety is often thought of as something that only children deal with; however, adults can also be diagnosed with separation anxiety disorder. People who have separation anxiety disorder have fears about being parted from people to whom they are attached. They often worry that some sort of harm or something untoward will happen to their attachment figures while they are separated. This fear leads them to avoid being separated from their attachment figures and to avoid being alone. People with separation anxiety may have nightmares about being separated from attachment figures or experience physical symptoms when separation occurs or is anticipated.Selective mutism: A somewhat rare disorder associated with anxiety is selective mutism. Selective mutism occurs when people fail to speak in specific social situations despite having normal language skills. Selective mutism usually occurs before the age of 5 and is often associated with extreme shyness, fear of social embarrassment, compulsive traits, withdrawal, clinging behavior, and temper tantrums. People diagnosed with selective mutism are often also diagnosed with other anxiety disorders.Researchers are finding that both genetic and environmental factors contribute to the risk of developing an anxiety disorder. Although the risk factors for each type of anxiety disorder can vary, some general risk factors for all types of anxiety disorders include:Anxiety disorders are generally treated with psychotherapy, medication, or both. There are many ways to treat anxiety and people should work with their doctor to choose the treatment that is best for them.Psychotherapy or “talk therapy” can help people with anxiety disorders. To be effective, psychotherapy must be directed at the person’s specific anxieties and tailored to his or her needs.Cognitive Behavioral TherapyCognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) is an example of one type of psychotherapy that can help people with anxiety disorders. It teaches people different ways of thinking, behaving, and reacting to anxiety-producing and fearful objects and situations. CBT can also help people learn and practice social skills, which is vital for treating social anxiety disorder.Cognitive therapy and exposure therapy are two CBT methods that are often used, together or by themselves, to treat social anxiety disorder. Cognitive therapy focuses on identifying, challenging, and then neutralizing unhelpful or distorted thoughts underlying anxiety disorders. Exposure therapy focuses on confronting the fears underlying an anxiety disorder to help people engage in activities they have been avoiding. Exposure therapy is sometimes used along with relaxation exercises and/or imagery.CBT can be conducted individually or with a group of people who have similar difficulties. Often “homework” is assigned for participants to complete between sessions.Medication does not cure anxiety disorders but can help relieve symptoms. Medication for anxiety is prescribed by doctors, such as a psychiatrist or primary care provider. Some states also allow psychologists who have received specialized training to prescribe psychiatric medications. The most common classes of medications used to combat anxiety disorders are anti-anxiety drugs (such as benzodiazepines), antidepressants, and beta-blockers.Anti-Anxiety MedicationsAnti-anxiety medications can help reduce the symptoms of anxiety, panic attacks, or extreme fear and worry. The most common anti-anxiety medications are called benzodiazepines. Although benzodiazepines are sometimes used as first-line treatments for generalized anxiety disorder, they have both benefits and drawbacks.Some benefits of benzodiazepines are that they are effective in relieving anxiety and take effect more quickly than antidepressant medications often prescribed for anxiety. Some drawbacks of benzodiazepines are that people can build up a tolerance to them if they are taken over a long period of time and they may need higher and higher doses to get the same effect. Some people may even become dependent on them.To avoid these problems, doctors usually prescribe benzodiazepines for short periods of time, a practice that is especially helpful for older adults, people who have substance abuse problems, and people who become dependent on medication easily.If people suddenly stop taking benzodiazepines, they may have withdrawal symptoms, or their anxiety may return. Therefore, benzodiazepines should be tapered off slowly. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose.For long-term use, benzodiazepines are often considered a second-line treatment for anxiety (with antidepressants being considered a first-line treatment) as well as an “as-needed” treatment for any distressing flare-ups of symptoms.A different type of anti-anxiety medication is buspirone. Buspirone is a non-benzodiazepine medication specifically indicated for the treatment of chronic anxiety, although it does not help everyone.AntidepressantsAntidepressants are used to treat depression, but they can also be helpful for treating anxiety disorders. They may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. You may need to try several different antidepressant medicines before finding the one that improves your symptoms and has manageable side effects. A medication that has helped you or a close family member in the past will often be considered.Antidepressants can take time to work, so it’s important to give the medication a chance before reaching a conclusion about its effectiveness. If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Antidepressants called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) are commonly used as first-line treatments for anxiety. Less-commonly used — but effective — treatments for anxiety disorders are older classes of antidepressants, such as tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs).Please Note: In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may experience an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressant medications, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. Because of this, patients of all ages taking antidepressants should be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.Beta-BlockersAlthough beta-blockers are most often used to treat high blood pressure, they can also be used to help relieve the physical symptoms of anxiety, such as rapid heartbeat, shaking, trembling, and blushing. These medications, when taken for a short period of time, can help people keep physical symptoms under control. They can also be used “as needed” to reduce acute anxiety, including as a preventive intervention for some predictable forms of performance anxieties.Choosing the Right MedicationSome types of drugs may work better for specific types of anxiety disorders, so people should work closely with their doctor to identify which medication is best for them. Certain substances such as caffeine, some over-the-counter cold medicines, illicit drugs, and herbal supplements may aggravate the symptoms of anxiety disorders or interact with prescribed medication. Patients should talk with their doctor, so they can learn which substances are safe and which to avoid.Choosing the right medication, medication dose, and treatment plan should be done under an expert’s care and should be based on a person’s needs and their medical situation. Your doctor may try several medicines before finding the right one.You and your doctor should discuss:For more information, please visit Mental Health Medications Health Topic webpage. Please note that any information on this website regarding medications is provided for educational purposes only and may be outdated. Diagnosis and treatment decisions should be made in consultation with your doctor. Information about medications changes frequently. Please visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website for the latest information on warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Some people with anxiety disorders might benefit from joining a self-help or support group and sharing their problems and achievements with others. Internet chat rooms might also be useful, but any advice received over the internet should be used with caution, as Internet acquaintances have usually never seen each other and what has helped one person is not necessarily what is best for another. You should always check with your doctor before following any treatment advice found on the internet. Talking with a trusted friend or member of the clergy can also provide support, but it is not necessarily a sufficient alternative to care from a doctor or other health professional.Stress management techniques and meditation can help people with anxiety disorders calm themselves and may enhance the effects of therapy. Research suggests that aerobic exercise can help some people manage their anxiety; however, exercise should not take the place of standard care and more research is needed.Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including anxiety disorders. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, new psychotherapies, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe.Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future. Decisions about whether to apply for a clinical trial and which ones are best suited for a given individual are best made in collaboration with a licensed health professional.To learn more about clinical trials, please visit the NIH Clinical Research Trials and You website. To find a clinical trial, visit ClinicalTrials.gov.Last Revised: July 2018 Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreThis brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).This brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a chronic disorder in which a person has uncontrollable, reoccurring thoughts and behaviors.This brochure discusses symptoms, causes, and treatments for panic disorder, a type of anxiety disorder associated with sudden and repeated attacks of fear.More Publications About Anxiety DisordersThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
HTTP Error 400. The request URL is invalid.
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you find it hard to pay attention? Do you feel the need to move constantly during times when you shouldn’t? Do you find yourself constantly interrupting others? If these issues are ongoing and you feel that they are negatively impacting your daily life, it could be a sign of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).ADHD is a disorder that makes it difficult for a person to pay attention and control impulsive behaviors. He or she may also be restless and almost constantly active.ADHD is not just a childhood disorder. Although the symptoms of ADHD begin in childhood, ADHD can continue through adolescence and adulthood. Even though hyperactivity tends to improve as a child becomes a teen, problems with inattention, disorganization, and poor impulse control often continue through the teen years and into adulthood.Researchers at the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), National Institutes of Health (NIH), and across the country are studying the causes of ADHD. Current research suggests ADHD may be caused by interactions between genes and environmental or non-genetic factors. Like many other illnesses, a number of factors may contribute to ADHD such as:People with ADHD show an ongoing pattern of three different types of symptoms:These symptoms get in the way of functioning or development. People who have ADHD have combinations of these symptoms:Signs of hyperactivity and impulsivity may include:Showing these signs and symptoms does not necessarily mean a person has ADHD. Many other problems, like anxiety, depression, and certain types of learning disabilities, can have similar symptoms. If you are concerned about whether you or your child might have ADHD, the first step is to talk with a health care professional to find out if the symptoms fit the diagnosis. The diagnosis can be made by a mental health professional, like a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, primary care provider, or pediatrician.Although there is no cure for ADHD, currently available treatments may help reduce symptoms and improve functioning. ADHD is commonly treated with medication, education or training, therapy, or a combination of treatments.For many people, ADHD medications reduce hyperactivity and impulsivity and improve their ability to focus, work, and learn. The first line of treatment for ADHD is stimulants.Stimulants: Although it may seem unusual to treat ADHD with a medication that is considered a stimulant, it is effective. Many researchers think that stimulants are effective because the medication increases the brain chemical dopamine, which plays essential roles in thinking and attention.Non-Stimulants: These medications take longer to start working than stimulants, but can also improve focus, attention, and impulsivity in a person with ADHD. Doctors may prescribe a non-stimulant if a person had bothersome side effects from stimulants, if a stimulant was not effective, or in combination with a stimulant to increase effectiveness. Two examples of non-stimulant medications include atomoxetine and guanfacine.Antidepressants: Although antidepressants are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) specifically for the treatment of ADHD, antidepressants are sometimes used to treat adults with ADHD. Older antidepressants, called tricyclics, sometimes are used because they, like stimulants, affect the brain chemicals norepinephrine and dopamine.There are many different types and brands of these medications—all with potential benefits and side effects. Sometimes several different medications or dosages must be tried before finding the one that works for a particular person. Anyone taking medications must be monitored closely and carefully by their prescribing doctor.Call your doctor right away if you have any problems with your medicine or if you are worried that it might be doing more harm than good. Your doctor may be able to adjust the dose or change your prescription to a different one that may work better for you.There are different kinds of therapy that have been tried for ADHD, but research shows that therapy may not be effective in treating ADHD symptoms. However, adding therapy to an ADHD treatment plan may help patients and families better cope with daily challenges.For Children and Teens: Parents and teachers can help children and teens with ADHD stay organized and follow directions with tools such as keeping a routine and a schedule, organizing everyday items, using homework and notebook organizers, and giving praise or rewards when rules are followed.For Adults: A licensed mental health provider or therapist can help an adult with ADHD learn how to organize his or her life with tools such as keeping routines and breaking down large tasks into more manageable, smaller tasks.Children and adults with ADHD need guidance and understanding from their parents, families, and teachers to reach their full potential and to succeed. Mental health professionals can educate the parents of a child with ADHD about the condition and how it affects a family. They can also help the child and his or her parents develop new skills, attitudes, and ways of relating to each other. Examples include:Adding behavioral therapy, counseling, and practical support can help people with ADHD and their families to better cope with everyday problems.Some schools offer special education services to children with ADHD who qualify. Educational specialists help the child, parents, and teachers make changes to classroom and homework assignments to help the child succeed. Public schools are required to offer these services for qualified children, which may be free for families living within the school district. Learn more about the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), visit http://idea.ed.gov/.The National Resource Center on ADHD, a program of Children and Adults with Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (CHADD®) supported by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), has information and many resources. You can reach this center online at www.help4adhd.org or by phone at 1-800-233-4050. You can also visit the NIMH’s Help for Mental Illness page at www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp.It’s your involvement that helps researchers to ultimately uncover better ways to treat, prevent, diagnose, and understand human disease. You can get involved by participating in a clinical research trial. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Clinical trials can also look at other aspects of care, such as improving the quality of life for people with chronic illnesses.Researchers at the NIMH and other NIH institutes, such as the National Human Genome Research Institute, conduct research in many areas including cognition, genetics, epidemiology, brain imaging, and treatment development. The studies take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland. If you think you might be interested in participating in a clinical trial, you should talk to your doctor about whether to apply and identify which ones are right for you. To learn about studies on ADHD that are currently recruiting at NIMH, visit http://www.nimh.nih.gov/joinastudy.To find a clinical trial near you, visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial’s purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from your health care provider.To learn more about ADHD, visit:National Institute of Mental Health www.nimh.nih.govCenters for Disease Control and Preventionhttps://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/adhd/MedlinePlus (National Library of Medicine) https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/attentiondeficithyperactivitydisorder.htmlThis publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to use these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or e-mail nimhinfo@nih.gov.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to mentalhealth.gov at http://www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.gov U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES National Institutes of Health National Institute of Mental Health NIH Publication No. QF 16-3572 Revised 2016The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you find it hard to pay attention? Do you feel the need to move constantly during times when you shouldn’t? Do you find yourself constantly interrupting others? If these issues are ongoing and you feel that they are negatively impacting your daily life, it could be a sign of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).ADHD is a disorder that makes it difficult for a person to pay attention and control impulsive behaviors. He or she may also be restless and almost constantly active.ADHD is not just a childhood disorder. Although the symptoms of ADHD begin in childhood, ADHD can continue through adolescence and adulthood. Even though hyperactivity tends to improve as a child becomes a teen, problems with inattention, disorganization, and poor impulse control often continue through the teen years and into adulthood.Researchers at the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), National Institutes of Health (NIH), and across the country are studying the causes of ADHD. Current research suggests ADHD may be caused by interactions between genes and environmental or non-genetic factors. Like many other illnesses, a number of factors may contribute to ADHD such as:People with ADHD show an ongoing pattern of three different types of symptoms:These symptoms get in the way of functioning or development. People who have ADHD have combinations of these symptoms:Signs of hyperactivity and impulsivity may include:Showing these signs and symptoms does not necessarily mean a person has ADHD. Many other problems, like anxiety, depression, and certain types of learning disabilities, can have similar symptoms. If you are concerned about whether you or your child might have ADHD, the first step is to talk with a health care professional to find out if the symptoms fit the diagnosis. The diagnosis can be made by a mental health professional, like a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, primary care provider, or pediatrician.Although there is no cure for ADHD, currently available treatments may help reduce symptoms and improve functioning. ADHD is commonly treated with medication, education or training, therapy, or a combination of treatments.For many people, ADHD medications reduce hyperactivity and impulsivity and improve their ability to focus, work, and learn. The first line of treatment for ADHD is stimulants.Stimulants: Although it may seem unusual to treat ADHD with a medication that is considered a stimulant, it is effective. Many researchers think that stimulants are effective because the medication increases the brain chemical dopamine, which plays essential roles in thinking and attention.Non-Stimulants: These medications take longer to start working than stimulants, but can also improve focus, attention, and impulsivity in a person with ADHD. Doctors may prescribe a non-stimulant if a person had bothersome side effects from stimulants, if a stimulant was not effective, or in combination with a stimulant to increase effectiveness. Two examples of non-stimulant medications include atomoxetine and guanfacine.Antidepressants: Although antidepressants are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) specifically for the treatment of ADHD, antidepressants are sometimes used to treat adults with ADHD. Older antidepressants, called tricyclics, sometimes are used because they, like stimulants, affect the brain chemicals norepinephrine and dopamine.There are many different types and brands of these medications—all with potential benefits and side effects. Sometimes several different medications or dosages must be tried before finding the one that works for a particular person. Anyone taking medications must be monitored closely and carefully by their prescribing doctor.Call your doctor right away if you have any problems with your medicine or if you are worried that it might be doing more harm than good. Your doctor may be able to adjust the dose or change your prescription to a different one that may work better for you.There are different kinds of therapy that have been tried for ADHD, but research shows that therapy may not be effective in treating ADHD symptoms. However, adding therapy to an ADHD treatment plan may help patients and families better cope with daily challenges.For Children and Teens: Parents and teachers can help children and teens with ADHD stay organized and follow directions with tools such as keeping a routine and a schedule, organizing everyday items, using homework and notebook organizers, and giving praise or rewards when rules are followed.For Adults: A licensed mental health provider or therapist can help an adult with ADHD learn how to organize his or her life with tools such as keeping routines and breaking down large tasks into more manageable, smaller tasks.Children and adults with ADHD need guidance and understanding from their parents, families, and teachers to reach their full potential and to succeed. Mental health professionals can educate the parents of a child with ADHD about the condition and how it affects a family. They can also help the child and his or her parents develop new skills, attitudes, and ways of relating to each other. Examples include:Adding behavioral therapy, counseling, and practical support can help people with ADHD and their families to better cope with everyday problems.Some schools offer special education services to children with ADHD who qualify. Educational specialists help the child, parents, and teachers make changes to classroom and homework assignments to help the child succeed. Public schools are required to offer these services for qualified children, which may be free for families living within the school district. Learn more about the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), visit http://idea.ed.gov/.The National Resource Center on ADHD, a program of Children and Adults with Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (CHADD®) supported by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), has information and many resources. You can reach this center online at www.help4adhd.org or by phone at 1-800-233-4050. You can also visit the NIMH’s Help for Mental Illness page at www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp.It’s your involvement that helps researchers to ultimately uncover better ways to treat, prevent, diagnose, and understand human disease. You can get involved by participating in a clinical research trial. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Clinical trials can also look at other aspects of care, such as improving the quality of life for people with chronic illnesses.Researchers at the NIMH and other NIH institutes, such as the National Human Genome Research Institute, conduct research in many areas including cognition, genetics, epidemiology, brain imaging, and treatment development. The studies take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland. If you think you might be interested in participating in a clinical trial, you should talk to your doctor about whether to apply and identify which ones are right for you. To learn about studies on ADHD that are currently recruiting at NIMH, visit http://www.nimh.nih.gov/joinastudy.To find a clinical trial near you, visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial’s purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from your health care provider.To learn more about ADHD, visit:National Institute of Mental Health www.nimh.nih.govCenters for Disease Control and Preventionhttps://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/adhd/MedlinePlus (National Library of Medicine) https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/attentiondeficithyperactivitydisorder.htmlThis publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to use these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or e-mail nimhinfo@nih.gov.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to mentalhealth.gov at http://www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.gov U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES National Institutes of Health National Institute of Mental Health NIH Publication No. QF 16-3572 Revised 2016The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you find it hard to pay attention? Do you feel the need to move constantly during times when you shouldn’t? Do you find yourself constantly interrupting others? If these issues are ongoing and you feel that they are negatively impacting your daily life, it could be a sign of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).ADHD is a disorder that makes it difficult for a person to pay attention and control impulsive behaviors. He or she may also be restless and almost constantly active.ADHD is not just a childhood disorder. Although the symptoms of ADHD begin in childhood, ADHD can continue through adolescence and adulthood. Even though hyperactivity tends to improve as a child becomes a teen, problems with inattention, disorganization, and poor impulse control often continue through the teen years and into adulthood.Researchers at the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), National Institutes of Health (NIH), and across the country are studying the causes of ADHD. Current research suggests ADHD may be caused by interactions between genes and environmental or non-genetic factors. Like many other illnesses, a number of factors may contribute to ADHD such as:People with ADHD show an ongoing pattern of three different types of symptoms:These symptoms get in the way of functioning or development. People who have ADHD have combinations of these symptoms:Signs of hyperactivity and impulsivity may include:Showing these signs and symptoms does not necessarily mean a person has ADHD. Many other problems, like anxiety, depression, and certain types of learning disabilities, can have similar symptoms. If you are concerned about whether you or your child might have ADHD, the first step is to talk with a health care professional to find out if the symptoms fit the diagnosis. The diagnosis can be made by a mental health professional, like a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, primary care provider, or pediatrician.Although there is no cure for ADHD, currently available treatments may help reduce symptoms and improve functioning. ADHD is commonly treated with medication, education or training, therapy, or a combination of treatments.For many people, ADHD medications reduce hyperactivity and impulsivity and improve their ability to focus, work, and learn. The first line of treatment for ADHD is stimulants.Stimulants: Although it may seem unusual to treat ADHD with a medication that is considered a stimulant, it is effective. Many researchers think that stimulants are effective because the medication increases the brain chemical dopamine, which plays essential roles in thinking and attention.Non-Stimulants: These medications take longer to start working than stimulants, but can also improve focus, attention, and impulsivity in a person with ADHD. Doctors may prescribe a non-stimulant if a person had bothersome side effects from stimulants, if a stimulant was not effective, or in combination with a stimulant to increase effectiveness. Two examples of non-stimulant medications include atomoxetine and guanfacine.Antidepressants: Although antidepressants are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) specifically for the treatment of ADHD, antidepressants are sometimes used to treat adults with ADHD. Older antidepressants, called tricyclics, sometimes are used because they, like stimulants, affect the brain chemicals norepinephrine and dopamine.There are many different types and brands of these medications—all with potential benefits and side effects. Sometimes several different medications or dosages must be tried before finding the one that works for a particular person. Anyone taking medications must be monitored closely and carefully by their prescribing doctor.Call your doctor right away if you have any problems with your medicine or if you are worried that it might be doing more harm than good. Your doctor may be able to adjust the dose or change your prescription to a different one that may work better for you.There are different kinds of therapy that have been tried for ADHD, but research shows that therapy may not be effective in treating ADHD symptoms. However, adding therapy to an ADHD treatment plan may help patients and families better cope with daily challenges.For Children and Teens: Parents and teachers can help children and teens with ADHD stay organized and follow directions with tools such as keeping a routine and a schedule, organizing everyday items, using homework and notebook organizers, and giving praise or rewards when rules are followed.For Adults: A licensed mental health provider or therapist can help an adult with ADHD learn how to organize his or her life with tools such as keeping routines and breaking down large tasks into more manageable, smaller tasks.Children and adults with ADHD need guidance and understanding from their parents, families, and teachers to reach their full potential and to succeed. Mental health professionals can educate the parents of a child with ADHD about the condition and how it affects a family. They can also help the child and his or her parents develop new skills, attitudes, and ways of relating to each other. Examples include:Adding behavioral therapy, counseling, and practical support can help people with ADHD and their families to better cope with everyday problems.Some schools offer special education services to children with ADHD who qualify. Educational specialists help the child, parents, and teachers make changes to classroom and homework assignments to help the child succeed. Public schools are required to offer these services for qualified children, which may be free for families living within the school district. Learn more about the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), visit http://idea.ed.gov/.The National Resource Center on ADHD, a program of Children and Adults with Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (CHADD®) supported by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), has information and many resources. You can reach this center online at www.help4adhd.org or by phone at 1-800-233-4050. You can also visit the NIMH’s Help for Mental Illness page at www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp.It’s your involvement that helps researchers to ultimately uncover better ways to treat, prevent, diagnose, and understand human disease. You can get involved by participating in a clinical research trial. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Clinical trials can also look at other aspects of care, such as improving the quality of life for people with chronic illnesses.Researchers at the NIMH and other NIH institutes, such as the National Human Genome Research Institute, conduct research in many areas including cognition, genetics, epidemiology, brain imaging, and treatment development. The studies take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland. If you think you might be interested in participating in a clinical trial, you should talk to your doctor about whether to apply and identify which ones are right for you. To learn about studies on ADHD that are currently recruiting at NIMH, visit http://www.nimh.nih.gov/joinastudy.To find a clinical trial near you, visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial’s purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from your health care provider.To learn more about ADHD, visit:National Institute of Mental Health www.nimh.nih.govCenters for Disease Control and Preventionhttps://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/adhd/MedlinePlus (National Library of Medicine) https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/attentiondeficithyperactivitydisorder.htmlThis publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to use these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or e-mail nimhinfo@nih.gov.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to mentalhealth.gov at http://www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.gov U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES National Institutes of Health National Institute of Mental Health NIH Publication No. QF 16-3572 Revised 2016The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you feel very happy and outgoing—or very irritable—on some days, but unusually sad or anxious on other days? Do the “up” periods go along with increased energy or activity? Do the “downs” go along with low energy, hopelessness, or inability to enjoy what you usually like to do, and sometimes suicidal thoughts? Do these mood swings make it hard to sleep, stay focused, or get things done? Some people with these symptoms have a lifelong but treatable mental disorder called bipolar disorder.Bipolar disorder is a chronic or episodic (which means occurring occasionally and at irregular intervals) mental disorder. It can cause unusual, often extreme and fluctuating changes in mood, energy, activity, and concentration or focus. Bipolar disorder sometimes is called manic-depressive disorder or manic depression, which are older terms.Everyone goes through normal ups and downs, but bipolar disorder is different. The range of mood changes can be extreme. In manic episodes, someone might feel very happy, irritable, or “up,” and there is a marked increase in activity level. In depressive episodes, someone might feel sad, indifferent, or hopeless, in combination with a very low activity level. Some people have hypomanic episodes, which are like manic episodes, but less severe and troublesome.Most of the time, bipolar disorder develops or starts during late adolescence (teen years) or early adulthood. Occasionally, bipolar symptoms can appear in children. Although the symptoms come and go, bipolar disorder usually requires lifetime treatment and does not go away on its own. Bipolar disorder can be an important factor in suicide, job loss, and family discord, but proper treatment leads to better outcomes.The symptoms of bipolar disorder can vary. An individual with bipolar disorder may have manic episodes, depressive episodes, or “mixed” episodes. A mixed episode has both manic and depressive symptoms. These mood episodes cause symptoms that last a week or two or sometimes longer. During an episode, the symptoms last every day for most of the day. Mood episodes are intense. The feelings are intense and happen along with changes in behavior, energy levels, or activity levels that are noticeable to others.Some people with bipolar disorder may have milder symptoms than others with the disorder. For example, hypomanic episodes may make the individual feel very good and be very productive; they may not feel like anything is wrong. However, family and friends may notice the mood swings and changes in activity levels as behavior that is different from usual, and severe depression may follow mild hypomanic episodes.There are three basic types of bipolar disorder; all of them involve clear changes in mood, energy, and activity levels. These moods range from periods of extremely “up,” elated, and energized behavior or increased activity levels (manic episodes) to very sad, “down,” hopeless, or low activity-level periods (depressive episodes). People with bipolar disorder also may have a normal (euthymic) mood alternating with depression. Four or more episodes of mania or depression in a year are termed “rapid cycling.”Many people with bipolar disorder also may have other mental health disorders or conditions such as:Some bipolar disorder symptoms are like those of other illnesses, which can lead to misdiagnosis. For example, some people with bipolar disorder who also have psychotic symptoms can be misdiagnosed with schizophrenia. Some physical health conditions, such as thyroid disease, can mimic the moods and other symptoms of bipolar disorder. Street drugs sometimes can mimic, provoke, or worsen mood symptoms.Looking at symptoms over the course of the illness (longitudinal follow-up) and the person’s family history can play a key role in determining whether the person has bipolar disorder with psychosis or schizophrenia.The exact cause of bipolar disorder is unknown. However, research suggests that there is no single cause. Instead, a combination of factors may contribute to bipolar disorder.Bipolar disorder often runs in families, and research suggests that this is mostly explained by heredity—people with certain genes are more likely to develop bipolar disorder than others. Many genes are involved, and no one gene can cause the disorder.But genes are not the only factor. Some studies of identical twins have found that even when one twin develops bipolar disorder, the other twin may not. Although people with a parent or sibling with bipolar disorder are more likely to develop the disorder themselves, most people with a family history of bipolar disorder will not develop the illness.Researchers are learning that the brain structure and function of people with bipolar disorder may be different from the brain structure and function of people who do not have bipolar disorder or other psychiatric disorders. Learning about the nature of these brain changes helps doctors better understand bipolar disorder and may in the future help predict which types of treatment will work best for a person with bipolar disorder. At this time, diagnosis is based on symptoms rather than brain imaging or other diagnostic tests.To diagnose bipolar disorder, a doctor or other health care provider may:A psychiatrist or other mental health professional diagnoses bipolar disorder based on the symptoms, lifetime course, and experiences of the individual. Some people have bipolar disorder for years before it is diagnosed. This may be because:Treatment helps many people, even those with the most severe forms of bipolar disorder. Doctors treat bipolar disorder with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of treatments.Certain medications can help control the symptoms of bipolar disorder. Some people may need to try several different medications and work with their doctor before finding the ones that work best. The most common types of medications that doctors prescribe include mood stabilizers and atypical antipsychotics. Mood stabilizers such as lithium can help prevent mood episodes or reduce their severity when they occur. Lithium also decreases the risk for suicide. Additional medications that target sleep or anxiety are sometimes added to mood stabilizers as part of a treatment plan.Talk with your doctor or a pharmacist to understand the risks and benefits of each medication. Report any concerns about side effects to your doctor right away. Avoid stopping medication without talking to your doctor first.Psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk therapy”) is a term for a variety of treatment techniques that aim to help a person identify and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. Psychotherapy can offer support, education, skills, and strategies to people with bipolar disorder and their families. Psychotherapy often is used in combination with medications; some types of psychotherapy (e.g., interpersonal, social rhythm therapy) can be an effective treatment for bipolar disorder when used with medications.Some people may find other treatments helpful in managing their bipolar symptoms, including:Not much research has been conducted on herbal or natural supplements and how they may affect bipolar disorder. Talk to your doctor before taking any supplement. Certain medications and supplements taken together can cause serious side effects or life-threatening drug reactions. Visit the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health for more information.The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is a federal research agency and cannot provide medical advice or referrals to practitioners. However, there are tools and resources available that may help you find a provider or treatment. You can also:Call the toll-free National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 800-273-TALK (8255), available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. This service is available to everyone. The deaf and hard of hearing can contact the Lifeline via TTY at 800-799-4889. All calls are free and confidential. Contact social media outlets directly if you are concerned about a friend’s social media updates, or dial 911 in an emergency.Living with bipolar disorder can be challenging, but there are ways to help make it easier for yourself, a friend, or a loved one.Remember, bipolar disorder is a lifelong illness, but long-term, ongoing treatment can help control symptoms and enable you to live a healthy life.The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) conducts and supports research on bipolar disorder that increases our understanding of its causes and helps develop new treatments. Researchers continue to study genetics and bipolar disorder, brain function, and symptoms in children and teens who have bipolar disorder, as well as family history in health and behavior.Learn more about NIMH’s research priorities and current studies.Clinical research is medical research that involves people like you. People volunteer to participate in carefully conducted investigations that ultimately uncover better ways to treat, prevent, diagnose, and understand human disease. Clinical research includes trials that test new treatments and therapies as well as long-term natural history studies, which provide valuable information about how disease and health progress.Please Note: Decisions about participating in a clinical trial and determining which ones are best suited for you are best made in collaboration with your licensed health professional.NIMH researchers conduct studies in a wide range of areas related to the brain and mental disorders. The studies usually take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, MD, and may require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with a clinician. Visit www.nimh.nih.gov/health/trials/index.shtml or www.nimh.nih.gov/joinastudy for more information.To find a clinical trial near you, you can visit www.clinicaltrials.gov. This website is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial’s purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.Talk to your doctor about clinical trials, their benefits and risks, and whether one is right for you. Learn more about clinical trials by visiting the following websites:Through clinical trials, researchers are making discoveries that can be used in everyday practice to help people.The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration provides this online resource for locating mental health treatment facilities and programs. The Mental Health Treatment Locator section of the Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator lists facilities providing mental health services to persons with mental illness. Find a facility in your state at https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov. For additional resources, visit www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp.Asking questions and providing information to your doctorealth care provider can improve your care. Talking with your doctor builds trust and leads to better results, quality, safety, and satisfaction. Visit the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality website for tips.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce this publication and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to follow these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and the use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 866‑615‑6464 or email nimhinfo@nih.gov.NIMH website www.nimh.nih.govMedlinePlus (National Library of Medicine)https://medlineplus.gov (En español: https://medlineplus.gov/spanish)ClinicalTrials.govwww.clinicaltrials.gov (En español: https://salud.nih.gov/investigacion-clinica)National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or Toll-free: 866-615-NIMH (6464) TTY: 301-443-8431 or TTY Toll-free: 866-415-8051 Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.govU.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. QF 18-3679  Revised October 2018The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you feel very happy and outgoing—or very irritable—on some days, but unusually sad or anxious on other days? Do the “up” periods go along with increased energy or activity? Do the “downs” go along with low energy, hopelessness, or inability to enjoy what you usually like to do, and sometimes suicidal thoughts? Do these mood swings make it hard to sleep, stay focused, or get things done? Some people with these symptoms have a lifelong but treatable mental disorder called bipolar disorder.Bipolar disorder is a chronic or episodic (which means occurring occasionally and at irregular intervals) mental disorder. It can cause unusual, often extreme and fluctuating changes in mood, energy, activity, and concentration or focus. Bipolar disorder sometimes is called manic-depressive disorder or manic depression, which are older terms.Everyone goes through normal ups and downs, but bipolar disorder is different. The range of mood changes can be extreme. In manic episodes, someone might feel very happy, irritable, or “up,” and there is a marked increase in activity level. In depressive episodes, someone might feel sad, indifferent, or hopeless, in combination with a very low activity level. Some people have hypomanic episodes, which are like manic episodes, but less severe and troublesome.Most of the time, bipolar disorder develops or starts during late adolescence (teen years) or early adulthood. Occasionally, bipolar symptoms can appear in children. Although the symptoms come and go, bipolar disorder usually requires lifetime treatment and does not go away on its own. Bipolar disorder can be an important factor in suicide, job loss, and family discord, but proper treatment leads to better outcomes.The symptoms of bipolar disorder can vary. An individual with bipolar disorder may have manic episodes, depressive episodes, or “mixed” episodes. A mixed episode has both manic and depressive symptoms. These mood episodes cause symptoms that last a week or two or sometimes longer. During an episode, the symptoms last every day for most of the day. Mood episodes are intense. The feelings are intense and happen along with changes in behavior, energy levels, or activity levels that are noticeable to others.Some people with bipolar disorder may have milder symptoms than others with the disorder. For example, hypomanic episodes may make the individual feel very good and be very productive; they may not feel like anything is wrong. However, family and friends may notice the mood swings and changes in activity levels as behavior that is different from usual, and severe depression may follow mild hypomanic episodes.There are three basic types of bipolar disorder; all of them involve clear changes in mood, energy, and activity levels. These moods range from periods of extremely “up,” elated, and energized behavior or increased activity levels (manic episodes) to very sad, “down,” hopeless, or low activity-level periods (depressive episodes). People with bipolar disorder also may have a normal (euthymic) mood alternating with depression. Four or more episodes of mania or depression in a year are termed “rapid cycling.”Many people with bipolar disorder also may have other mental health disorders or conditions such as:Some bipolar disorder symptoms are like those of other illnesses, which can lead to misdiagnosis. For example, some people with bipolar disorder who also have psychotic symptoms can be misdiagnosed with schizophrenia. Some physical health conditions, such as thyroid disease, can mimic the moods and other symptoms of bipolar disorder. Street drugs sometimes can mimic, provoke, or worsen mood symptoms.Looking at symptoms over the course of the illness (longitudinal follow-up) and the person’s family history can play a key role in determining whether the person has bipolar disorder with psychosis or schizophrenia.The exact cause of bipolar disorder is unknown. However, research suggests that there is no single cause. Instead, a combination of factors may contribute to bipolar disorder.Bipolar disorder often runs in families, and research suggests that this is mostly explained by heredity—people with certain genes are more likely to develop bipolar disorder than others. Many genes are involved, and no one gene can cause the disorder.But genes are not the only factor. Some studies of identical twins have found that even when one twin develops bipolar disorder, the other twin may not. Although people with a parent or sibling with bipolar disorder are more likely to develop the disorder themselves, most people with a family history of bipolar disorder will not develop the illness.Researchers are learning that the brain structure and function of people with bipolar disorder may be different from the brain structure and function of people who do not have bipolar disorder or other psychiatric disorders. Learning about the nature of these brain changes helps doctors better understand bipolar disorder and may in the future help predict which types of treatment will work best for a person with bipolar disorder. At this time, diagnosis is based on symptoms rather than brain imaging or other diagnostic tests.To diagnose bipolar disorder, a doctor or other health care provider may:A psychiatrist or other mental health professional diagnoses bipolar disorder based on the symptoms, lifetime course, and experiences of the individual. Some people have bipolar disorder for years before it is diagnosed. This may be because:Treatment helps many people, even those with the most severe forms of bipolar disorder. Doctors treat bipolar disorder with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of treatments.Certain medications can help control the symptoms of bipolar disorder. Some people may need to try several different medications and work with their doctor before finding the ones that work best. The most common types of medications that doctors prescribe include mood stabilizers and atypical antipsychotics. Mood stabilizers such as lithium can help prevent mood episodes or reduce their severity when they occur. Lithium also decreases the risk for suicide. Additional medications that target sleep or anxiety are sometimes added to mood stabilizers as part of a treatment plan.Talk with your doctor or a pharmacist to understand the risks and benefits of each medication. Report any concerns about side effects to your doctor right away. Avoid stopping medication without talking to your doctor first.Psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk therapy”) is a term for a variety of treatment techniques that aim to help a person identify and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. Psychotherapy can offer support, education, skills, and strategies to people with bipolar disorder and their families. Psychotherapy often is used in combination with medications; some types of psychotherapy (e.g., interpersonal, social rhythm therapy) can be an effective treatment for bipolar disorder when used with medications.Some people may find other treatments helpful in managing their bipolar symptoms, including:Not much research has been conducted on herbal or natural supplements and how they may affect bipolar disorder. Talk to your doctor before taking any supplement. Certain medications and supplements taken together can cause serious side effects or life-threatening drug reactions. Visit the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health for more information.The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is a federal research agency and cannot provide medical advice or referrals to practitioners. However, there are tools and resources available that may help you find a provider or treatment. You can also:Call the toll-free National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 800-273-TALK (8255), available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. This service is available to everyone. The deaf and hard of hearing can contact the Lifeline via TTY at 800-799-4889. All calls are free and confidential. Contact social media outlets directly if you are concerned about a friend’s social media updates, or dial 911 in an emergency.Living with bipolar disorder can be challenging, but there are ways to help make it easier for yourself, a friend, or a loved one.Remember, bipolar disorder is a lifelong illness, but long-term, ongoing treatment can help control symptoms and enable you to live a healthy life.The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) conducts and supports research on bipolar disorder that increases our understanding of its causes and helps develop new treatments. Researchers continue to study genetics and bipolar disorder, brain function, and symptoms in children and teens who have bipolar disorder, as well as family history in health and behavior.Learn more about NIMH’s research priorities and current studies.Clinical research is medical research that involves people like you. People volunteer to participate in carefully conducted investigations that ultimately uncover better ways to treat, prevent, diagnose, and understand human disease. Clinical research includes trials that test new treatments and therapies as well as long-term natural history studies, which provide valuable information about how disease and health progress.Please Note: Decisions about participating in a clinical trial and determining which ones are best suited for you are best made in collaboration with your licensed health professional.NIMH researchers conduct studies in a wide range of areas related to the brain and mental disorders. The studies usually take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, MD, and may require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with a clinician. Visit www.nimh.nih.gov/health/trials/index.shtml or www.nimh.nih.gov/joinastudy for more information.To find a clinical trial near you, you can visit www.clinicaltrials.gov. This website is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial’s purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.Talk to your doctor about clinical trials, their benefits and risks, and whether one is right for you. Learn more about clinical trials by visiting the following websites:Through clinical trials, researchers are making discoveries that can be used in everyday practice to help people.The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration provides this online resource for locating mental health treatment facilities and programs. The Mental Health Treatment Locator section of the Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator lists facilities providing mental health services to persons with mental illness. Find a facility in your state at https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov. For additional resources, visit www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp.Asking questions and providing information to your doctorealth care provider can improve your care. Talking with your doctor builds trust and leads to better results, quality, safety, and satisfaction. Visit the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality website for tips.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce this publication and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to follow these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and the use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 866‑615‑6464 or email nimhinfo@nih.gov.NIMH website www.nimh.nih.govMedlinePlus (National Library of Medicine)https://medlineplus.gov (En español: https://medlineplus.gov/spanish)ClinicalTrials.govwww.clinicaltrials.gov (En español: https://salud.nih.gov/investigacion-clinica)National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or Toll-free: 866-615-NIMH (6464) TTY: 301-443-8431 or TTY Toll-free: 866-415-8051 Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.govU.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. QF 18-3679  Revised October 2018The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDoes your child go through intense mood changes? Does your child have extreme behavior changes? Does your child get much more excited and active than other kids his or her age? Do other people say your child is too excited or too moody? Do you notice he or she has highs and lows much more often than other children? Do these mood changes affect how your child acts at school or at home?Some children and teens with these symptoms may have bipolar disorder, a serious mental illness. This brochure will give you more information.Bipolar disorder is a serious brain illness. It is also called manic-depressive illness or manic depression. Children with bipolar disorder go through unusual mood changes. Sometimes they feel very happy or “up,” and are much more energetic and active than usual, or than other kids their age. This is called a manic episode. Sometimes children with bipolar disorder feel very sad and “down,” and are much less active than usual. This is called depression or a depressive episode.Bipolar disorder is not the same as the normal ups and downs every kid goes through. Bipolar symptoms are more powerful than that. The mood swings are more extreme and are accompanied by changes in sleep, energy level, and the ability to think clearly. Bipolar symptoms are so strong, they can make it hard for a child to do well in school or get along with friends and family members. The illness can also be dangerous. Some young people with bipolar disorder try to hurt themselves or attempt suicide.Children and teens with bipolar disorder should get treatment. With help, they can manage their symptoms and lead successful lives.Anyone can develop bipolar disorder, including children and teens. However, most people with bipolar disorder develop it in their late teen or early adult years. The illness usually lasts a lifetime.Doctors do not know what causes bipolar disorder, but several things may contribute to the illness. Family genes may be one factor because bipolar disorder sometimes runs in families. However, it is important to know that just because someone in your family has bipolar disorder, it does not mean other members of the family will have it as well.Another factor that may lead to bipolar disorder is the brain structure or the brain function of the person with the disorder. Scientists are finding out more about the disorder by studying it. This research may help doctors do a better job of treating people. Also, this research may help doctors to predict whether a person will get bipolar disorder. One day, doctors may be able to prevent the illness in some people.Bipolar “mood episodes” include unusual mood changes along with unusual sleep habits, activity levels, thoughts, or behavior. In a child, these mood and activity changes must be very different from their usual behavior and from the behavior of other children. A person with bipolar disorder may have manic episodes, depressive episodes, or “mixed” episodes. A mixed episode has both manic and depressive symptoms. These mood episodes cause symptoms that last a week or two or sometimes longer. During an episode, the symptoms last every day for most of the day.Children and teens having a manic episode may:Children and teens having a depressive episode may:Young people with bipolar disorder can have several problems at the same time. These include:Sometimes behavior problems go along with mood episodes. Young people may take a lot of risks, such as driving too fast or spending too much money. Some young people with bipolar disorder think about suicide. Watch for any signs of suicidal thinking. Take these signs seriously and call your child’s doctor.An experienced doctor will carefully examine your child. There are no blood tests or brain scans that can diagnose bipolar disorder. Instead, the doctor will ask questions about your child’s mood and sleeping patterns. The doctor will also ask about your child’s energy and behavior. Sometimes doctors need to know about medical problems in your family, such as depression or alcoholism. The doctor may use tests to see if something other than bipolar disorder is causing your child’s symptoms.Right now, there is no cure for bipolar disorder. Doctors often treat children who have the illness in much the same way they treat adults. Treatment can help control symptoms. Steady, dependable treatment works better than treatment that starts and stops. Treatment options include:With treatment, children and teens with bipolar disorder can get better over time. It helps when doctors, parents, and young people work together.Sometimes a child’s bipolar disorder changes. When this happens, treatment needs to change too. For example, your child may need to try a different medication. The doctor may also recommend other treatment changes. Symptoms may come back after a while, and more adjustments may be needed. Treatment can take time, but sticking with it helps many children and teens have fewer bipolar symptoms.You can help treatment be more effective. Try keeping a chart of your child’s moods, behaviors, and sleep patterns. This is called a “daily life chart” or “mood chart.” It can help you and your child understand and track the illness. A chart can also help the doctor see whether treatment is working.Help begins with the right diagnosis and treatment. If you think your child may have bipolar disorder, make an appointment with your family doctor to talk about the symptoms you notice.If your child has bipolar disorder, here are some basic things you can do:Taking care of a child or teenager with bipolar disorder can be stressful for you, too. You have to cope with the mood swings and other problems, such as short tempers and risky activities. This can challenge any parent. Sometimes the stress can strain your relationships with other people, and you may miss work or lose free time.If you are taking care of a child with bipolar disorder, take care of yourself too. Find someone you can talk to about your feelings. Talk with the doctor about support groups for caregivers. If you keep your stress level down, you will do a better job. It might help your child get better too.If you’re not sure where to get help, call your family doctor. You can also check the phone book for mental health professionals. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency. Finally, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) has an online tool to help you find mental health services in your area. You can find it here: https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov.If you know someone who might be thinking about hurting himself or herself or someone else, get help quickly.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at http://www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Institute of Mental HealthNIH Publication No. QF 15-6380 Revised 2015The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDoes your child go through intense mood changes? Does your child have extreme behavior changes? Does your child get much more excited and active than other kids his or her age? Do other people say your child is too excited or too moody? Do you notice he or she has highs and lows much more often than other children? Do these mood changes affect how your child acts at school or at home?Some children and teens with these symptoms may have bipolar disorder, a serious mental illness. This brochure will give you more information.Bipolar disorder is a serious brain illness. It is also called manic-depressive illness or manic depression. Children with bipolar disorder go through unusual mood changes. Sometimes they feel very happy or “up,” and are much more energetic and active than usual, or than other kids their age. This is called a manic episode. Sometimes children with bipolar disorder feel very sad and “down,” and are much less active than usual. This is called depression or a depressive episode.Bipolar disorder is not the same as the normal ups and downs every kid goes through. Bipolar symptoms are more powerful than that. The mood swings are more extreme and are accompanied by changes in sleep, energy level, and the ability to think clearly. Bipolar symptoms are so strong, they can make it hard for a child to do well in school or get along with friends and family members. The illness can also be dangerous. Some young people with bipolar disorder try to hurt themselves or attempt suicide.Children and teens with bipolar disorder should get treatment. With help, they can manage their symptoms and lead successful lives.Anyone can develop bipolar disorder, including children and teens. However, most people with bipolar disorder develop it in their late teen or early adult years. The illness usually lasts a lifetime.Doctors do not know what causes bipolar disorder, but several things may contribute to the illness. Family genes may be one factor because bipolar disorder sometimes runs in families. However, it is important to know that just because someone in your family has bipolar disorder, it does not mean other members of the family will have it as well.Another factor that may lead to bipolar disorder is the brain structure or the brain function of the person with the disorder. Scientists are finding out more about the disorder by studying it. This research may help doctors do a better job of treating people. Also, this research may help doctors to predict whether a person will get bipolar disorder. One day, doctors may be able to prevent the illness in some people.Bipolar “mood episodes” include unusual mood changes along with unusual sleep habits, activity levels, thoughts, or behavior. In a child, these mood and activity changes must be very different from their usual behavior and from the behavior of other children. A person with bipolar disorder may have manic episodes, depressive episodes, or “mixed” episodes. A mixed episode has both manic and depressive symptoms. These mood episodes cause symptoms that last a week or two or sometimes longer. During an episode, the symptoms last every day for most of the day.Children and teens having a manic episode may:Children and teens having a depressive episode may:Young people with bipolar disorder can have several problems at the same time. These include:Sometimes behavior problems go along with mood episodes. Young people may take a lot of risks, such as driving too fast or spending too much money. Some young people with bipolar disorder think about suicide. Watch for any signs of suicidal thinking. Take these signs seriously and call your child’s doctor.An experienced doctor will carefully examine your child. There are no blood tests or brain scans that can diagnose bipolar disorder. Instead, the doctor will ask questions about your child’s mood and sleeping patterns. The doctor will also ask about your child’s energy and behavior. Sometimes doctors need to know about medical problems in your family, such as depression or alcoholism. The doctor may use tests to see if something other than bipolar disorder is causing your child’s symptoms.Right now, there is no cure for bipolar disorder. Doctors often treat children who have the illness in much the same way they treat adults. Treatment can help control symptoms. Steady, dependable treatment works better than treatment that starts and stops. Treatment options include:With treatment, children and teens with bipolar disorder can get better over time. It helps when doctors, parents, and young people work together.Sometimes a child’s bipolar disorder changes. When this happens, treatment needs to change too. For example, your child may need to try a different medication. The doctor may also recommend other treatment changes. Symptoms may come back after a while, and more adjustments may be needed. Treatment can take time, but sticking with it helps many children and teens have fewer bipolar symptoms.You can help treatment be more effective. Try keeping a chart of your child’s moods, behaviors, and sleep patterns. This is called a “daily life chart” or “mood chart.” It can help you and your child understand and track the illness. A chart can also help the doctor see whether treatment is working.Help begins with the right diagnosis and treatment. If you think your child may have bipolar disorder, make an appointment with your family doctor to talk about the symptoms you notice.If your child has bipolar disorder, here are some basic things you can do:Taking care of a child or teenager with bipolar disorder can be stressful for you, too. You have to cope with the mood swings and other problems, such as short tempers and risky activities. This can challenge any parent. Sometimes the stress can strain your relationships with other people, and you may miss work or lose free time.If you are taking care of a child with bipolar disorder, take care of yourself too. Find someone you can talk to about your feelings. Talk with the doctor about support groups for caregivers. If you keep your stress level down, you will do a better job. It might help your child get better too.If you’re not sure where to get help, call your family doctor. You can also check the phone book for mental health professionals. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency. Finally, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) has an online tool to help you find mental health services in your area. You can find it here: https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov.If you know someone who might be thinking about hurting himself or herself or someone else, get help quickly.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at http://www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Institute of Mental HealthNIH Publication No. QF 15-6380 Revised 2015The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDoes your child go through intense mood changes? Does your child have extreme behavior changes? Does your child get much more excited and active than other kids his or her age? Do other people say your child is too excited or too moody? Do you notice he or she has highs and lows much more often than other children? Do these mood changes affect how your child acts at school or at home?Some children and teens with these symptoms may have bipolar disorder, a serious mental illness. This brochure will give you more information.Bipolar disorder is a serious brain illness. It is also called manic-depressive illness or manic depression. Children with bipolar disorder go through unusual mood changes. Sometimes they feel very happy or “up,” and are much more energetic and active than usual, or than other kids their age. This is called a manic episode. Sometimes children with bipolar disorder feel very sad and “down,” and are much less active than usual. This is called depression or a depressive episode.Bipolar disorder is not the same as the normal ups and downs every kid goes through. Bipolar symptoms are more powerful than that. The mood swings are more extreme and are accompanied by changes in sleep, energy level, and the ability to think clearly. Bipolar symptoms are so strong, they can make it hard for a child to do well in school or get along with friends and family members. The illness can also be dangerous. Some young people with bipolar disorder try to hurt themselves or attempt suicide.Children and teens with bipolar disorder should get treatment. With help, they can manage their symptoms and lead successful lives.Anyone can develop bipolar disorder, including children and teens. However, most people with bipolar disorder develop it in their late teen or early adult years. The illness usually lasts a lifetime.Doctors do not know what causes bipolar disorder, but several things may contribute to the illness. Family genes may be one factor because bipolar disorder sometimes runs in families. However, it is important to know that just because someone in your family has bipolar disorder, it does not mean other members of the family will have it as well.Another factor that may lead to bipolar disorder is the brain structure or the brain function of the person with the disorder. Scientists are finding out more about the disorder by studying it. This research may help doctors do a better job of treating people. Also, this research may help doctors to predict whether a person will get bipolar disorder. One day, doctors may be able to prevent the illness in some people.Bipolar “mood episodes” include unusual mood changes along with unusual sleep habits, activity levels, thoughts, or behavior. In a child, these mood and activity changes must be very different from their usual behavior and from the behavior of other children. A person with bipolar disorder may have manic episodes, depressive episodes, or “mixed” episodes. A mixed episode has both manic and depressive symptoms. These mood episodes cause symptoms that last a week or two or sometimes longer. During an episode, the symptoms last every day for most of the day.Children and teens having a manic episode may:Children and teens having a depressive episode may:Young people with bipolar disorder can have several problems at the same time. These include:Sometimes behavior problems go along with mood episodes. Young people may take a lot of risks, such as driving too fast or spending too much money. Some young people with bipolar disorder think about suicide. Watch for any signs of suicidal thinking. Take these signs seriously and call your child’s doctor.An experienced doctor will carefully examine your child. There are no blood tests or brain scans that can diagnose bipolar disorder. Instead, the doctor will ask questions about your child’s mood and sleeping patterns. The doctor will also ask about your child’s energy and behavior. Sometimes doctors need to know about medical problems in your family, such as depression or alcoholism. The doctor may use tests to see if something other than bipolar disorder is causing your child’s symptoms.Right now, there is no cure for bipolar disorder. Doctors often treat children who have the illness in much the same way they treat adults. Treatment can help control symptoms. Steady, dependable treatment works better than treatment that starts and stops. Treatment options include:With treatment, children and teens with bipolar disorder can get better over time. It helps when doctors, parents, and young people work together.Sometimes a child’s bipolar disorder changes. When this happens, treatment needs to change too. For example, your child may need to try a different medication. The doctor may also recommend other treatment changes. Symptoms may come back after a while, and more adjustments may be needed. Treatment can take time, but sticking with it helps many children and teens have fewer bipolar symptoms.You can help treatment be more effective. Try keeping a chart of your child’s moods, behaviors, and sleep patterns. This is called a “daily life chart” or “mood chart.” It can help you and your child understand and track the illness. A chart can also help the doctor see whether treatment is working.Help begins with the right diagnosis and treatment. If you think your child may have bipolar disorder, make an appointment with your family doctor to talk about the symptoms you notice.If your child has bipolar disorder, here are some basic things you can do:Taking care of a child or teenager with bipolar disorder can be stressful for you, too. You have to cope with the mood swings and other problems, such as short tempers and risky activities. This can challenge any parent. Sometimes the stress can strain your relationships with other people, and you may miss work or lose free time.If you are taking care of a child with bipolar disorder, take care of yourself too. Find someone you can talk to about your feelings. Talk with the doctor about support groups for caregivers. If you keep your stress level down, you will do a better job. It might help your child get better too.If you’re not sure where to get help, call your family doctor. You can also check the phone book for mental health professionals. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency. Finally, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) has an online tool to help you find mental health services in your area. You can find it here: https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov.If you know someone who might be thinking about hurting himself or herself or someone else, get help quickly.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at http://www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Institute of Mental HealthNIH Publication No. QF 15-6380 Revised 2015The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDoes your child go through intense mood changes? Does your child have extreme behavior changes? Does your child get much more excited and active than other kids his or her age? Do other people say your child is too excited or too moody? Do you notice he or she has highs and lows much more often than other children? Do these mood changes affect how your child acts at school or at home?Some children and teens with these symptoms may have bipolar disorder, a serious mental illness. This brochure will give you more information.Bipolar disorder is a serious brain illness. It is also called manic-depressive illness or manic depression. Children with bipolar disorder go through unusual mood changes. Sometimes they feel very happy or “up,” and are much more energetic and active than usual, or than other kids their age. This is called a manic episode. Sometimes children with bipolar disorder feel very sad and “down,” and are much less active than usual. This is called depression or a depressive episode.Bipolar disorder is not the same as the normal ups and downs every kid goes through. Bipolar symptoms are more powerful than that. The mood swings are more extreme and are accompanied by changes in sleep, energy level, and the ability to think clearly. Bipolar symptoms are so strong, they can make it hard for a child to do well in school or get along with friends and family members. The illness can also be dangerous. Some young people with bipolar disorder try to hurt themselves or attempt suicide.Children and teens with bipolar disorder should get treatment. With help, they can manage their symptoms and lead successful lives.Anyone can develop bipolar disorder, including children and teens. However, most people with bipolar disorder develop it in their late teen or early adult years. The illness usually lasts a lifetime.Doctors do not know what causes bipolar disorder, but several things may contribute to the illness. Family genes may be one factor because bipolar disorder sometimes runs in families. However, it is important to know that just because someone in your family has bipolar disorder, it does not mean other members of the family will have it as well.Another factor that may lead to bipolar disorder is the brain structure or the brain function of the person with the disorder. Scientists are finding out more about the disorder by studying it. This research may help doctors do a better job of treating people. Also, this research may help doctors to predict whether a person will get bipolar disorder. One day, doctors may be able to prevent the illness in some people.Bipolar “mood episodes” include unusual mood changes along with unusual sleep habits, activity levels, thoughts, or behavior. In a child, these mood and activity changes must be very different from their usual behavior and from the behavior of other children. A person with bipolar disorder may have manic episodes, depressive episodes, or “mixed” episodes. A mixed episode has both manic and depressive symptoms. These mood episodes cause symptoms that last a week or two or sometimes longer. During an episode, the symptoms last every day for most of the day.Children and teens having a manic episode may:Children and teens having a depressive episode may:Young people with bipolar disorder can have several problems at the same time. These include:Sometimes behavior problems go along with mood episodes. Young people may take a lot of risks, such as driving too fast or spending too much money. Some young people with bipolar disorder think about suicide. Watch for any signs of suicidal thinking. Take these signs seriously and call your child’s doctor.An experienced doctor will carefully examine your child. There are no blood tests or brain scans that can diagnose bipolar disorder. Instead, the doctor will ask questions about your child’s mood and sleeping patterns. The doctor will also ask about your child’s energy and behavior. Sometimes doctors need to know about medical problems in your family, such as depression or alcoholism. The doctor may use tests to see if something other than bipolar disorder is causing your child’s symptoms.Right now, there is no cure for bipolar disorder. Doctors often treat children who have the illness in much the same way they treat adults. Treatment can help control symptoms. Steady, dependable treatment works better than treatment that starts and stops. Treatment options include:With treatment, children and teens with bipolar disorder can get better over time. It helps when doctors, parents, and young people work together.Sometimes a child’s bipolar disorder changes. When this happens, treatment needs to change too. For example, your child may need to try a different medication. The doctor may also recommend other treatment changes. Symptoms may come back after a while, and more adjustments may be needed. Treatment can take time, but sticking with it helps many children and teens have fewer bipolar symptoms.You can help treatment be more effective. Try keeping a chart of your child’s moods, behaviors, and sleep patterns. This is called a “daily life chart” or “mood chart.” It can help you and your child understand and track the illness. A chart can also help the doctor see whether treatment is working.Help begins with the right diagnosis and treatment. If you think your child may have bipolar disorder, make an appointment with your family doctor to talk about the symptoms you notice.If your child has bipolar disorder, here are some basic things you can do:Taking care of a child or teenager with bipolar disorder can be stressful for you, too. You have to cope with the mood swings and other problems, such as short tempers and risky activities. This can challenge any parent. Sometimes the stress can strain your relationships with other people, and you may miss work or lose free time.If you are taking care of a child with bipolar disorder, take care of yourself too. Find someone you can talk to about your feelings. Talk with the doctor about support groups for caregivers. If you keep your stress level down, you will do a better job. It might help your child get better too.If you’re not sure where to get help, call your family doctor. You can also check the phone book for mental health professionals. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency. Finally, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) has an online tool to help you find mental health services in your area. You can find it here: https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov.If you know someone who might be thinking about hurting himself or herself or someone else, get help quickly.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at http://www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Institute of Mental HealthNIH Publication No. QF 15-6380 Revised 2015The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDoes your child go through intense mood changes? Does your child have extreme behavior changes? Does your child get much more excited and active than other kids his or her age? Do other people say your child is too excited or too moody? Do you notice he or she has highs and lows much more often than other children? Do these mood changes affect how your child acts at school or at home?Some children and teens with these symptoms may have bipolar disorder, a serious mental illness. This brochure will give you more information.Bipolar disorder is a serious brain illness. It is also called manic-depressive illness or manic depression. Children with bipolar disorder go through unusual mood changes. Sometimes they feel very happy or “up,” and are much more energetic and active than usual, or than other kids their age. This is called a manic episode. Sometimes children with bipolar disorder feel very sad and “down,” and are much less active than usual. This is called depression or a depressive episode.Bipolar disorder is not the same as the normal ups and downs every kid goes through. Bipolar symptoms are more powerful than that. The mood swings are more extreme and are accompanied by changes in sleep, energy level, and the ability to think clearly. Bipolar symptoms are so strong, they can make it hard for a child to do well in school or get along with friends and family members. The illness can also be dangerous. Some young people with bipolar disorder try to hurt themselves or attempt suicide.Children and teens with bipolar disorder should get treatment. With help, they can manage their symptoms and lead successful lives.Anyone can develop bipolar disorder, including children and teens. However, most people with bipolar disorder develop it in their late teen or early adult years. The illness usually lasts a lifetime.Doctors do not know what causes bipolar disorder, but several things may contribute to the illness. Family genes may be one factor because bipolar disorder sometimes runs in families. However, it is important to know that just because someone in your family has bipolar disorder, it does not mean other members of the family will have it as well.Another factor that may lead to bipolar disorder is the brain structure or the brain function of the person with the disorder. Scientists are finding out more about the disorder by studying it. This research may help doctors do a better job of treating people. Also, this research may help doctors to predict whether a person will get bipolar disorder. One day, doctors may be able to prevent the illness in some people.Bipolar “mood episodes” include unusual mood changes along with unusual sleep habits, activity levels, thoughts, or behavior. In a child, these mood and activity changes must be very different from their usual behavior and from the behavior of other children. A person with bipolar disorder may have manic episodes, depressive episodes, or “mixed” episodes. A mixed episode has both manic and depressive symptoms. These mood episodes cause symptoms that last a week or two or sometimes longer. During an episode, the symptoms last every day for most of the day.Children and teens having a manic episode may:Children and teens having a depressive episode may:Young people with bipolar disorder can have several problems at the same time. These include:Sometimes behavior problems go along with mood episodes. Young people may take a lot of risks, such as driving too fast or spending too much money. Some young people with bipolar disorder think about suicide. Watch for any signs of suicidal thinking. Take these signs seriously and call your child’s doctor.An experienced doctor will carefully examine your child. There are no blood tests or brain scans that can diagnose bipolar disorder. Instead, the doctor will ask questions about your child’s mood and sleeping patterns. The doctor will also ask about your child’s energy and behavior. Sometimes doctors need to know about medical problems in your family, such as depression or alcoholism. The doctor may use tests to see if something other than bipolar disorder is causing your child’s symptoms.Right now, there is no cure for bipolar disorder. Doctors often treat children who have the illness in much the same way they treat adults. Treatment can help control symptoms. Steady, dependable treatment works better than treatment that starts and stops. Treatment options include:With treatment, children and teens with bipolar disorder can get better over time. It helps when doctors, parents, and young people work together.Sometimes a child’s bipolar disorder changes. When this happens, treatment needs to change too. For example, your child may need to try a different medication. The doctor may also recommend other treatment changes. Symptoms may come back after a while, and more adjustments may be needed. Treatment can take time, but sticking with it helps many children and teens have fewer bipolar symptoms.You can help treatment be more effective. Try keeping a chart of your child’s moods, behaviors, and sleep patterns. This is called a “daily life chart” or “mood chart.” It can help you and your child understand and track the illness. A chart can also help the doctor see whether treatment is working.Help begins with the right diagnosis and treatment. If you think your child may have bipolar disorder, make an appointment with your family doctor to talk about the symptoms you notice.If your child has bipolar disorder, here are some basic things you can do:Taking care of a child or teenager with bipolar disorder can be stressful for you, too. You have to cope with the mood swings and other problems, such as short tempers and risky activities. This can challenge any parent. Sometimes the stress can strain your relationships with other people, and you may miss work or lose free time.If you are taking care of a child with bipolar disorder, take care of yourself too. Find someone you can talk to about your feelings. Talk with the doctor about support groups for caregivers. If you keep your stress level down, you will do a better job. It might help your child get better too.If you’re not sure where to get help, call your family doctor. You can also check the phone book for mental health professionals. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency. Finally, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) has an online tool to help you find mental health services in your area. You can find it here: https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov.If you know someone who might be thinking about hurting himself or herself or someone else, get help quickly.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at http://www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Institute of Mental HealthNIH Publication No. QF 15-6380 Revised 2015The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you feel very happy and outgoing—or very irritable—on some days, but unusually sad or anxious on other days? Do the “up” periods go along with increased energy or activity? Do the “downs” go along with low energy, hopelessness, or inability to enjoy what you usually like to do, and sometimes suicidal thoughts? Do these mood swings make it hard to sleep, stay focused, or get things done? Some people with these symptoms have a lifelong but treatable mental disorder called bipolar disorder.Bipolar disorder is a chronic or episodic (which means occurring occasionally and at irregular intervals) mental disorder. It can cause unusual, often extreme and fluctuating changes in mood, energy, activity, and concentration or focus. Bipolar disorder sometimes is called manic-depressive disorder or manic depression, which are older terms.Everyone goes through normal ups and downs, but bipolar disorder is different. The range of mood changes can be extreme. In manic episodes, someone might feel very happy, irritable, or “up,” and there is a marked increase in activity level. In depressive episodes, someone might feel sad, indifferent, or hopeless, in combination with a very low activity level. Some people have hypomanic episodes, which are like manic episodes, but less severe and troublesome.Most of the time, bipolar disorder develops or starts during late adolescence (teen years) or early adulthood. Occasionally, bipolar symptoms can appear in children. Although the symptoms come and go, bipolar disorder usually requires lifetime treatment and does not go away on its own. Bipolar disorder can be an important factor in suicide, job loss, and family discord, but proper treatment leads to better outcomes.The symptoms of bipolar disorder can vary. An individual with bipolar disorder may have manic episodes, depressive episodes, or “mixed” episodes. A mixed episode has both manic and depressive symptoms. These mood episodes cause symptoms that last a week or two or sometimes longer. During an episode, the symptoms last every day for most of the day. Mood episodes are intense. The feelings are intense and happen along with changes in behavior, energy levels, or activity levels that are noticeable to others.Some people with bipolar disorder may have milder symptoms than others with the disorder. For example, hypomanic episodes may make the individual feel very good and be very productive; they may not feel like anything is wrong. However, family and friends may notice the mood swings and changes in activity levels as behavior that is different from usual, and severe depression may follow mild hypomanic episodes.There are three basic types of bipolar disorder; all of them involve clear changes in mood, energy, and activity levels. These moods range from periods of extremely “up,” elated, and energized behavior or increased activity levels (manic episodes) to very sad, “down,” hopeless, or low activity-level periods (depressive episodes). People with bipolar disorder also may have a normal (euthymic) mood alternating with depression. Four or more episodes of mania or depression in a year are termed “rapid cycling.”Many people with bipolar disorder also may have other mental health disorders or conditions such as:Some bipolar disorder symptoms are like those of other illnesses, which can lead to misdiagnosis. For example, some people with bipolar disorder who also have psychotic symptoms can be misdiagnosed with schizophrenia. Some physical health conditions, such as thyroid disease, can mimic the moods and other symptoms of bipolar disorder. Street drugs sometimes can mimic, provoke, or worsen mood symptoms.Looking at symptoms over the course of the illness (longitudinal follow-up) and the person’s family history can play a key role in determining whether the person has bipolar disorder with psychosis or schizophrenia.The exact cause of bipolar disorder is unknown. However, research suggests that there is no single cause. Instead, a combination of factors may contribute to bipolar disorder.Bipolar disorder often runs in families, and research suggests that this is mostly explained by heredity—people with certain genes are more likely to develop bipolar disorder than others. Many genes are involved, and no one gene can cause the disorder.But genes are not the only factor. Some studies of identical twins have found that even when one twin develops bipolar disorder, the other twin may not. Although people with a parent or sibling with bipolar disorder are more likely to develop the disorder themselves, most people with a family history of bipolar disorder will not develop the illness.Researchers are learning that the brain structure and function of people with bipolar disorder may be different from the brain structure and function of people who do not have bipolar disorder or other psychiatric disorders. Learning about the nature of these brain changes helps doctors better understand bipolar disorder and may in the future help predict which types of treatment will work best for a person with bipolar disorder. At this time, diagnosis is based on symptoms rather than brain imaging or other diagnostic tests.To diagnose bipolar disorder, a doctor or other health care provider may:A psychiatrist or other mental health professional diagnoses bipolar disorder based on the symptoms, lifetime course, and experiences of the individual. Some people have bipolar disorder for years before it is diagnosed. This may be because:Treatment helps many people, even those with the most severe forms of bipolar disorder. Doctors treat bipolar disorder with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of treatments.Certain medications can help control the symptoms of bipolar disorder. Some people may need to try several different medications and work with their doctor before finding the ones that work best. The most common types of medications that doctors prescribe include mood stabilizers and atypical antipsychotics. Mood stabilizers such as lithium can help prevent mood episodes or reduce their severity when they occur. Lithium also decreases the risk for suicide. Additional medications that target sleep or anxiety are sometimes added to mood stabilizers as part of a treatment plan.Talk with your doctor or a pharmacist to understand the risks and benefits of each medication. Report any concerns about side effects to your doctor right away. Avoid stopping medication without talking to your doctor first.Psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk therapy”) is a term for a variety of treatment techniques that aim to help a person identify and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. Psychotherapy can offer support, education, skills, and strategies to people with bipolar disorder and their families. Psychotherapy often is used in combination with medications; some types of psychotherapy (e.g., interpersonal, social rhythm therapy) can be an effective treatment for bipolar disorder when used with medications.Some people may find other treatments helpful in managing their bipolar symptoms, including:Not much research has been conducted on herbal or natural supplements and how they may affect bipolar disorder. Talk to your doctor before taking any supplement. Certain medications and supplements taken together can cause serious side effects or life-threatening drug reactions. Visit the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health for more information.The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is a federal research agency and cannot provide medical advice or referrals to practitioners. However, there are tools and resources available that may help you find a provider or treatment. You can also:Call the toll-free National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 800-273-TALK (8255), available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. This service is available to everyone. The deaf and hard of hearing can contact the Lifeline via TTY at 800-799-4889. All calls are free and confidential. Contact social media outlets directly if you are concerned about a friend’s social media updates, or dial 911 in an emergency.Living with bipolar disorder can be challenging, but there are ways to help make it easier for yourself, a friend, or a loved one.Remember, bipolar disorder is a lifelong illness, but long-term, ongoing treatment can help control symptoms and enable you to live a healthy life.The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) conducts and supports research on bipolar disorder that increases our understanding of its causes and helps develop new treatments. Researchers continue to study genetics and bipolar disorder, brain function, and symptoms in children and teens who have bipolar disorder, as well as family history in health and behavior.Learn more about NIMH’s research priorities and current studies.Clinical research is medical research that involves people like you. People volunteer to participate in carefully conducted investigations that ultimately uncover better ways to treat, prevent, diagnose, and understand human disease. Clinical research includes trials that test new treatments and therapies as well as long-term natural history studies, which provide valuable information about how disease and health progress.Please Note: Decisions about participating in a clinical trial and determining which ones are best suited for you are best made in collaboration with your licensed health professional.NIMH researchers conduct studies in a wide range of areas related to the brain and mental disorders. The studies usually take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, MD, and may require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with a clinician. Visit www.nimh.nih.gov/health/trials/index.shtml or www.nimh.nih.gov/joinastudy for more information.To find a clinical trial near you, you can visit www.clinicaltrials.gov. This website is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial’s purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.Talk to your doctor about clinical trials, their benefits and risks, and whether one is right for you. Learn more about clinical trials by visiting the following websites:Through clinical trials, researchers are making discoveries that can be used in everyday practice to help people.The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration provides this online resource for locating mental health treatment facilities and programs. The Mental Health Treatment Locator section of the Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator lists facilities providing mental health services to persons with mental illness. Find a facility in your state at https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov. For additional resources, visit www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp.Asking questions and providing information to your doctorealth care provider can improve your care. Talking with your doctor builds trust and leads to better results, quality, safety, and satisfaction. Visit the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality website for tips.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce this publication and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to follow these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and the use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 866‑615‑6464 or email nimhinfo@nih.gov.NIMH website www.nimh.nih.govMedlinePlus (National Library of Medicine)https://medlineplus.gov (En español: https://medlineplus.gov/spanish)ClinicalTrials.govwww.clinicaltrials.gov (En español: https://salud.nih.gov/investigacion-clinica)National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or Toll-free: 866-615-NIMH (6464) TTY: 301-443-8431 or TTY Toll-free: 866-415-8051 Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.govU.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. QF 18-3679  Revised October 2018The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you feel very happy and outgoing—or very irritable—on some days, but unusually sad or anxious on other days? Do the “up” periods go along with increased energy or activity? Do the “downs” go along with low energy, hopelessness, or inability to enjoy what you usually like to do, and sometimes suicidal thoughts? Do these mood swings make it hard to sleep, stay focused, or get things done? Some people with these symptoms have a lifelong but treatable mental disorder called bipolar disorder.Bipolar disorder is a chronic or episodic (which means occurring occasionally and at irregular intervals) mental disorder. It can cause unusual, often extreme and fluctuating changes in mood, energy, activity, and concentration or focus. Bipolar disorder sometimes is called manic-depressive disorder or manic depression, which are older terms.Everyone goes through normal ups and downs, but bipolar disorder is different. The range of mood changes can be extreme. In manic episodes, someone might feel very happy, irritable, or “up,” and there is a marked increase in activity level. In depressive episodes, someone might feel sad, indifferent, or hopeless, in combination with a very low activity level. Some people have hypomanic episodes, which are like manic episodes, but less severe and troublesome.Most of the time, bipolar disorder develops or starts during late adolescence (teen years) or early adulthood. Occasionally, bipolar symptoms can appear in children. Although the symptoms come and go, bipolar disorder usually requires lifetime treatment and does not go away on its own. Bipolar disorder can be an important factor in suicide, job loss, and family discord, but proper treatment leads to better outcomes.The symptoms of bipolar disorder can vary. An individual with bipolar disorder may have manic episodes, depressive episodes, or “mixed” episodes. A mixed episode has both manic and depressive symptoms. These mood episodes cause symptoms that last a week or two or sometimes longer. During an episode, the symptoms last every day for most of the day. Mood episodes are intense. The feelings are intense and happen along with changes in behavior, energy levels, or activity levels that are noticeable to others.Some people with bipolar disorder may have milder symptoms than others with the disorder. For example, hypomanic episodes may make the individual feel very good and be very productive; they may not feel like anything is wrong. However, family and friends may notice the mood swings and changes in activity levels as behavior that is different from usual, and severe depression may follow mild hypomanic episodes.There are three basic types of bipolar disorder; all of them involve clear changes in mood, energy, and activity levels. These moods range from periods of extremely “up,” elated, and energized behavior or increased activity levels (manic episodes) to very sad, “down,” hopeless, or low activity-level periods (depressive episodes). People with bipolar disorder also may have a normal (euthymic) mood alternating with depression. Four or more episodes of mania or depression in a year are termed “rapid cycling.”Many people with bipolar disorder also may have other mental health disorders or conditions such as:Some bipolar disorder symptoms are like those of other illnesses, which can lead to misdiagnosis. For example, some people with bipolar disorder who also have psychotic symptoms can be misdiagnosed with schizophrenia. Some physical health conditions, such as thyroid disease, can mimic the moods and other symptoms of bipolar disorder. Street drugs sometimes can mimic, provoke, or worsen mood symptoms.Looking at symptoms over the course of the illness (longitudinal follow-up) and the person’s family history can play a key role in determining whether the person has bipolar disorder with psychosis or schizophrenia.The exact cause of bipolar disorder is unknown. However, research suggests that there is no single cause. Instead, a combination of factors may contribute to bipolar disorder.Bipolar disorder often runs in families, and research suggests that this is mostly explained by heredity—people with certain genes are more likely to develop bipolar disorder than others. Many genes are involved, and no one gene can cause the disorder.But genes are not the only factor. Some studies of identical twins have found that even when one twin develops bipolar disorder, the other twin may not. Although people with a parent or sibling with bipolar disorder are more likely to develop the disorder themselves, most people with a family history of bipolar disorder will not develop the illness.Researchers are learning that the brain structure and function of people with bipolar disorder may be different from the brain structure and function of people who do not have bipolar disorder or other psychiatric disorders. Learning about the nature of these brain changes helps doctors better understand bipolar disorder and may in the future help predict which types of treatment will work best for a person with bipolar disorder. At this time, diagnosis is based on symptoms rather than brain imaging or other diagnostic tests.To diagnose bipolar disorder, a doctor or other health care provider may:A psychiatrist or other mental health professional diagnoses bipolar disorder based on the symptoms, lifetime course, and experiences of the individual. Some people have bipolar disorder for years before it is diagnosed. This may be because:Treatment helps many people, even those with the most severe forms of bipolar disorder. Doctors treat bipolar disorder with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of treatments.Certain medications can help control the symptoms of bipolar disorder. Some people may need to try several different medications and work with their doctor before finding the ones that work best. The most common types of medications that doctors prescribe include mood stabilizers and atypical antipsychotics. Mood stabilizers such as lithium can help prevent mood episodes or reduce their severity when they occur. Lithium also decreases the risk for suicide. Additional medications that target sleep or anxiety are sometimes added to mood stabilizers as part of a treatment plan.Talk with your doctor or a pharmacist to understand the risks and benefits of each medication. Report any concerns about side effects to your doctor right away. Avoid stopping medication without talking to your doctor first.Psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk therapy”) is a term for a variety of treatment techniques that aim to help a person identify and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. Psychotherapy can offer support, education, skills, and strategies to people with bipolar disorder and their families. Psychotherapy often is used in combination with medications; some types of psychotherapy (e.g., interpersonal, social rhythm therapy) can be an effective treatment for bipolar disorder when used with medications.Some people may find other treatments helpful in managing their bipolar symptoms, including:Not much research has been conducted on herbal or natural supplements and how they may affect bipolar disorder. Talk to your doctor before taking any supplement. Certain medications and supplements taken together can cause serious side effects or life-threatening drug reactions. Visit the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health for more information.The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is a federal research agency and cannot provide medical advice or referrals to practitioners. However, there are tools and resources available that may help you find a provider or treatment. You can also:Call the toll-free National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 800-273-TALK (8255), available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. This service is available to everyone. The deaf and hard of hearing can contact the Lifeline via TTY at 800-799-4889. All calls are free and confidential. Contact social media outlets directly if you are concerned about a friend’s social media updates, or dial 911 in an emergency.Living with bipolar disorder can be challenging, but there are ways to help make it easier for yourself, a friend, or a loved one.Remember, bipolar disorder is a lifelong illness, but long-term, ongoing treatment can help control symptoms and enable you to live a healthy life.The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) conducts and supports research on bipolar disorder that increases our understanding of its causes and helps develop new treatments. Researchers continue to study genetics and bipolar disorder, brain function, and symptoms in children and teens who have bipolar disorder, as well as family history in health and behavior.Learn more about NIMH’s research priorities and current studies.Clinical research is medical research that involves people like you. People volunteer to participate in carefully conducted investigations that ultimately uncover better ways to treat, prevent, diagnose, and understand human disease. Clinical research includes trials that test new treatments and therapies as well as long-term natural history studies, which provide valuable information about how disease and health progress.Please Note: Decisions about participating in a clinical trial and determining which ones are best suited for you are best made in collaboration with your licensed health professional.NIMH researchers conduct studies in a wide range of areas related to the brain and mental disorders. The studies usually take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, MD, and may require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with a clinician. Visit www.nimh.nih.gov/health/trials/index.shtml or www.nimh.nih.gov/joinastudy for more information.To find a clinical trial near you, you can visit www.clinicaltrials.gov. This website is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial’s purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.Talk to your doctor about clinical trials, their benefits and risks, and whether one is right for you. Learn more about clinical trials by visiting the following websites:Through clinical trials, researchers are making discoveries that can be used in everyday practice to help people.The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration provides this online resource for locating mental health treatment facilities and programs. The Mental Health Treatment Locator section of the Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator lists facilities providing mental health services to persons with mental illness. Find a facility in your state at https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov. For additional resources, visit www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp.Asking questions and providing information to your doctorealth care provider can improve your care. Talking with your doctor builds trust and leads to better results, quality, safety, and satisfaction. Visit the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality website for tips.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce this publication and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to follow these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and the use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 866‑615‑6464 or email nimhinfo@nih.gov.NIMH website www.nimh.nih.govMedlinePlus (National Library of Medicine)https://medlineplus.gov (En español: https://medlineplus.gov/spanish)ClinicalTrials.govwww.clinicaltrials.gov (En español: https://salud.nih.gov/investigacion-clinica)National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or Toll-free: 866-615-NIMH (6464) TTY: 301-443-8431 or TTY Toll-free: 866-415-8051 Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.govU.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. QF 18-3679  Revised October 2018The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you feel very happy and outgoing—or very irritable—on some days, but unusually sad or anxious on other days? Do the “up” periods go along with increased energy or activity? Do the “downs” go along with low energy, hopelessness, or inability to enjoy what you usually like to do, and sometimes suicidal thoughts? Do these mood swings make it hard to sleep, stay focused, or get things done? Some people with these symptoms have a lifelong but treatable mental disorder called bipolar disorder.Bipolar disorder is a chronic or episodic (which means occurring occasionally and at irregular intervals) mental disorder. It can cause unusual, often extreme and fluctuating changes in mood, energy, activity, and concentration or focus. Bipolar disorder sometimes is called manic-depressive disorder or manic depression, which are older terms.Everyone goes through normal ups and downs, but bipolar disorder is different. The range of mood changes can be extreme. In manic episodes, someone might feel very happy, irritable, or “up,” and there is a marked increase in activity level. In depressive episodes, someone might feel sad, indifferent, or hopeless, in combination with a very low activity level. Some people have hypomanic episodes, which are like manic episodes, but less severe and troublesome.Most of the time, bipolar disorder develops or starts during late adolescence (teen years) or early adulthood. Occasionally, bipolar symptoms can appear in children. Although the symptoms come and go, bipolar disorder usually requires lifetime treatment and does not go away on its own. Bipolar disorder can be an important factor in suicide, job loss, and family discord, but proper treatment leads to better outcomes.The symptoms of bipolar disorder can vary. An individual with bipolar disorder may have manic episodes, depressive episodes, or “mixed” episodes. A mixed episode has both manic and depressive symptoms. These mood episodes cause symptoms that last a week or two or sometimes longer. During an episode, the symptoms last every day for most of the day. Mood episodes are intense. The feelings are intense and happen along with changes in behavior, energy levels, or activity levels that are noticeable to others.Some people with bipolar disorder may have milder symptoms than others with the disorder. For example, hypomanic episodes may make the individual feel very good and be very productive; they may not feel like anything is wrong. However, family and friends may notice the mood swings and changes in activity levels as behavior that is different from usual, and severe depression may follow mild hypomanic episodes.There are three basic types of bipolar disorder; all of them involve clear changes in mood, energy, and activity levels. These moods range from periods of extremely “up,” elated, and energized behavior or increased activity levels (manic episodes) to very sad, “down,” hopeless, or low activity-level periods (depressive episodes). People with bipolar disorder also may have a normal (euthymic) mood alternating with depression. Four or more episodes of mania or depression in a year are termed “rapid cycling.”Many people with bipolar disorder also may have other mental health disorders or conditions such as:Some bipolar disorder symptoms are like those of other illnesses, which can lead to misdiagnosis. For example, some people with bipolar disorder who also have psychotic symptoms can be misdiagnosed with schizophrenia. Some physical health conditions, such as thyroid disease, can mimic the moods and other symptoms of bipolar disorder. Street drugs sometimes can mimic, provoke, or worsen mood symptoms.Looking at symptoms over the course of the illness (longitudinal follow-up) and the person’s family history can play a key role in determining whether the person has bipolar disorder with psychosis or schizophrenia.The exact cause of bipolar disorder is unknown. However, research suggests that there is no single cause. Instead, a combination of factors may contribute to bipolar disorder.Bipolar disorder often runs in families, and research suggests that this is mostly explained by heredity—people with certain genes are more likely to develop bipolar disorder than others. Many genes are involved, and no one gene can cause the disorder.But genes are not the only factor. Some studies of identical twins have found that even when one twin develops bipolar disorder, the other twin may not. Although people with a parent or sibling with bipolar disorder are more likely to develop the disorder themselves, most people with a family history of bipolar disorder will not develop the illness.Researchers are learning that the brain structure and function of people with bipolar disorder may be different from the brain structure and function of people who do not have bipolar disorder or other psychiatric disorders. Learning about the nature of these brain changes helps doctors better understand bipolar disorder and may in the future help predict which types of treatment will work best for a person with bipolar disorder. At this time, diagnosis is based on symptoms rather than brain imaging or other diagnostic tests.To diagnose bipolar disorder, a doctor or other health care provider may:A psychiatrist or other mental health professional diagnoses bipolar disorder based on the symptoms, lifetime course, and experiences of the individual. Some people have bipolar disorder for years before it is diagnosed. This may be because:Treatment helps many people, even those with the most severe forms of bipolar disorder. Doctors treat bipolar disorder with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of treatments.Certain medications can help control the symptoms of bipolar disorder. Some people may need to try several different medications and work with their doctor before finding the ones that work best. The most common types of medications that doctors prescribe include mood stabilizers and atypical antipsychotics. Mood stabilizers such as lithium can help prevent mood episodes or reduce their severity when they occur. Lithium also decreases the risk for suicide. Additional medications that target sleep or anxiety are sometimes added to mood stabilizers as part of a treatment plan.Talk with your doctor or a pharmacist to understand the risks and benefits of each medication. Report any concerns about side effects to your doctor right away. Avoid stopping medication without talking to your doctor first.Psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk therapy”) is a term for a variety of treatment techniques that aim to help a person identify and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. Psychotherapy can offer support, education, skills, and strategies to people with bipolar disorder and their families. Psychotherapy often is used in combination with medications; some types of psychotherapy (e.g., interpersonal, social rhythm therapy) can be an effective treatment for bipolar disorder when used with medications.Some people may find other treatments helpful in managing their bipolar symptoms, including:Not much research has been conducted on herbal or natural supplements and how they may affect bipolar disorder. Talk to your doctor before taking any supplement. Certain medications and supplements taken together can cause serious side effects or life-threatening drug reactions. Visit the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health for more information.The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is a federal research agency and cannot provide medical advice or referrals to practitioners. However, there are tools and resources available that may help you find a provider or treatment. You can also:Call the toll-free National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 800-273-TALK (8255), available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. This service is available to everyone. The deaf and hard of hearing can contact the Lifeline via TTY at 800-799-4889. All calls are free and confidential. Contact social media outlets directly if you are concerned about a friend’s social media updates, or dial 911 in an emergency.Living with bipolar disorder can be challenging, but there are ways to help make it easier for yourself, a friend, or a loved one.Remember, bipolar disorder is a lifelong illness, but long-term, ongoing treatment can help control symptoms and enable you to live a healthy life.The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) conducts and supports research on bipolar disorder that increases our understanding of its causes and helps develop new treatments. Researchers continue to study genetics and bipolar disorder, brain function, and symptoms in children and teens who have bipolar disorder, as well as family history in health and behavior.Learn more about NIMH’s research priorities and current studies.Clinical research is medical research that involves people like you. People volunteer to participate in carefully conducted investigations that ultimately uncover better ways to treat, prevent, diagnose, and understand human disease. Clinical research includes trials that test new treatments and therapies as well as long-term natural history studies, which provide valuable information about how disease and health progress.Please Note: Decisions about participating in a clinical trial and determining which ones are best suited for you are best made in collaboration with your licensed health professional.NIMH researchers conduct studies in a wide range of areas related to the brain and mental disorders. The studies usually take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, MD, and may require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with a clinician. Visit www.nimh.nih.gov/health/trials/index.shtml or www.nimh.nih.gov/joinastudy for more information.To find a clinical trial near you, you can visit www.clinicaltrials.gov. This website is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial’s purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.Talk to your doctor about clinical trials, their benefits and risks, and whether one is right for you. Learn more about clinical trials by visiting the following websites:Through clinical trials, researchers are making discoveries that can be used in everyday practice to help people.The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration provides this online resource for locating mental health treatment facilities and programs. The Mental Health Treatment Locator section of the Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator lists facilities providing mental health services to persons with mental illness. Find a facility in your state at https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov. For additional resources, visit www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp.Asking questions and providing information to your doctorealth care provider can improve your care. Talking with your doctor builds trust and leads to better results, quality, safety, and satisfaction. Visit the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality website for tips.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce this publication and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to follow these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and the use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 866‑615‑6464 or email nimhinfo@nih.gov.NIMH website www.nimh.nih.govMedlinePlus (National Library of Medicine)https://medlineplus.gov (En español: https://medlineplus.gov/spanish)ClinicalTrials.govwww.clinicaltrials.gov (En español: https://salud.nih.gov/investigacion-clinica)National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or Toll-free: 866-615-NIMH (6464) TTY: 301-443-8431 or TTY Toll-free: 866-415-8051 Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.govU.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. QF 18-3679  Revised October 2018The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you feel very happy and outgoing—or very irritable—on some days, but unusually sad or anxious on other days? Do the “up” periods go along with increased energy or activity? Do the “downs” go along with low energy, hopelessness, or inability to enjoy what you usually like to do, and sometimes suicidal thoughts? Do these mood swings make it hard to sleep, stay focused, or get things done? Some people with these symptoms have a lifelong but treatable mental disorder called bipolar disorder.Bipolar disorder is a chronic or episodic (which means occurring occasionally and at irregular intervals) mental disorder. It can cause unusual, often extreme and fluctuating changes in mood, energy, activity, and concentration or focus. Bipolar disorder sometimes is called manic-depressive disorder or manic depression, which are older terms.Everyone goes through normal ups and downs, but bipolar disorder is different. The range of mood changes can be extreme. In manic episodes, someone might feel very happy, irritable, or “up,” and there is a marked increase in activity level. In depressive episodes, someone might feel sad, indifferent, or hopeless, in combination with a very low activity level. Some people have hypomanic episodes, which are like manic episodes, but less severe and troublesome.Most of the time, bipolar disorder develops or starts during late adolescence (teen years) or early adulthood. Occasionally, bipolar symptoms can appear in children. Although the symptoms come and go, bipolar disorder usually requires lifetime treatment and does not go away on its own. Bipolar disorder can be an important factor in suicide, job loss, and family discord, but proper treatment leads to better outcomes.The symptoms of bipolar disorder can vary. An individual with bipolar disorder may have manic episodes, depressive episodes, or “mixed” episodes. A mixed episode has both manic and depressive symptoms. These mood episodes cause symptoms that last a week or two or sometimes longer. During an episode, the symptoms last every day for most of the day. Mood episodes are intense. The feelings are intense and happen along with changes in behavior, energy levels, or activity levels that are noticeable to others.Some people with bipolar disorder may have milder symptoms than others with the disorder. For example, hypomanic episodes may make the individual feel very good and be very productive; they may not feel like anything is wrong. However, family and friends may notice the mood swings and changes in activity levels as behavior that is different from usual, and severe depression may follow mild hypomanic episodes.There are three basic types of bipolar disorder; all of them involve clear changes in mood, energy, and activity levels. These moods range from periods of extremely “up,” elated, and energized behavior or increased activity levels (manic episodes) to very sad, “down,” hopeless, or low activity-level periods (depressive episodes). People with bipolar disorder also may have a normal (euthymic) mood alternating with depression. Four or more episodes of mania or depression in a year are termed “rapid cycling.”Many people with bipolar disorder also may have other mental health disorders or conditions such as:Some bipolar disorder symptoms are like those of other illnesses, which can lead to misdiagnosis. For example, some people with bipolar disorder who also have psychotic symptoms can be misdiagnosed with schizophrenia. Some physical health conditions, such as thyroid disease, can mimic the moods and other symptoms of bipolar disorder. Street drugs sometimes can mimic, provoke, or worsen mood symptoms.Looking at symptoms over the course of the illness (longitudinal follow-up) and the person’s family history can play a key role in determining whether the person has bipolar disorder with psychosis or schizophrenia.The exact cause of bipolar disorder is unknown. However, research suggests that there is no single cause. Instead, a combination of factors may contribute to bipolar disorder.Bipolar disorder often runs in families, and research suggests that this is mostly explained by heredity—people with certain genes are more likely to develop bipolar disorder than others. Many genes are involved, and no one gene can cause the disorder.But genes are not the only factor. Some studies of identical twins have found that even when one twin develops bipolar disorder, the other twin may not. Although people with a parent or sibling with bipolar disorder are more likely to develop the disorder themselves, most people with a family history of bipolar disorder will not develop the illness.Researchers are learning that the brain structure and function of people with bipolar disorder may be different from the brain structure and function of people who do not have bipolar disorder or other psychiatric disorders. Learning about the nature of these brain changes helps doctors better understand bipolar disorder and may in the future help predict which types of treatment will work best for a person with bipolar disorder. At this time, diagnosis is based on symptoms rather than brain imaging or other diagnostic tests.To diagnose bipolar disorder, a doctor or other health care provider may:A psychiatrist or other mental health professional diagnoses bipolar disorder based on the symptoms, lifetime course, and experiences of the individual. Some people have bipolar disorder for years before it is diagnosed. This may be because:Treatment helps many people, even those with the most severe forms of bipolar disorder. Doctors treat bipolar disorder with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of treatments.Certain medications can help control the symptoms of bipolar disorder. Some people may need to try several different medications and work with their doctor before finding the ones that work best. The most common types of medications that doctors prescribe include mood stabilizers and atypical antipsychotics. Mood stabilizers such as lithium can help prevent mood episodes or reduce their severity when they occur. Lithium also decreases the risk for suicide. Additional medications that target sleep or anxiety are sometimes added to mood stabilizers as part of a treatment plan.Talk with your doctor or a pharmacist to understand the risks and benefits of each medication. Report any concerns about side effects to your doctor right away. Avoid stopping medication without talking to your doctor first.Psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk therapy”) is a term for a variety of treatment techniques that aim to help a person identify and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. Psychotherapy can offer support, education, skills, and strategies to people with bipolar disorder and their families. Psychotherapy often is used in combination with medications; some types of psychotherapy (e.g., interpersonal, social rhythm therapy) can be an effective treatment for bipolar disorder when used with medications.Some people may find other treatments helpful in managing their bipolar symptoms, including:Not much research has been conducted on herbal or natural supplements and how they may affect bipolar disorder. Talk to your doctor before taking any supplement. Certain medications and supplements taken together can cause serious side effects or life-threatening drug reactions. Visit the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health for more information.The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is a federal research agency and cannot provide medical advice or referrals to practitioners. However, there are tools and resources available that may help you find a provider or treatment. You can also:Call the toll-free National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 800-273-TALK (8255), available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. This service is available to everyone. The deaf and hard of hearing can contact the Lifeline via TTY at 800-799-4889. All calls are free and confidential. Contact social media outlets directly if you are concerned about a friend’s social media updates, or dial 911 in an emergency.Living with bipolar disorder can be challenging, but there are ways to help make it easier for yourself, a friend, or a loved one.Remember, bipolar disorder is a lifelong illness, but long-term, ongoing treatment can help control symptoms and enable you to live a healthy life.The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) conducts and supports research on bipolar disorder that increases our understanding of its causes and helps develop new treatments. Researchers continue to study genetics and bipolar disorder, brain function, and symptoms in children and teens who have bipolar disorder, as well as family history in health and behavior.Learn more about NIMH’s research priorities and current studies.Clinical research is medical research that involves people like you. People volunteer to participate in carefully conducted investigations that ultimately uncover better ways to treat, prevent, diagnose, and understand human disease. Clinical research includes trials that test new treatments and therapies as well as long-term natural history studies, which provide valuable information about how disease and health progress.Please Note: Decisions about participating in a clinical trial and determining which ones are best suited for you are best made in collaboration with your licensed health professional.NIMH researchers conduct studies in a wide range of areas related to the brain and mental disorders. The studies usually take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, MD, and may require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with a clinician. Visit www.nimh.nih.gov/health/trials/index.shtml or www.nimh.nih.gov/joinastudy for more information.To find a clinical trial near you, you can visit www.clinicaltrials.gov. This website is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial’s purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.Talk to your doctor about clinical trials, their benefits and risks, and whether one is right for you. Learn more about clinical trials by visiting the following websites:Through clinical trials, researchers are making discoveries that can be used in everyday practice to help people.The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration provides this online resource for locating mental health treatment facilities and programs. The Mental Health Treatment Locator section of the Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator lists facilities providing mental health services to persons with mental illness. Find a facility in your state at https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov. For additional resources, visit www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp.Asking questions and providing information to your doctorealth care provider can improve your care. Talking with your doctor builds trust and leads to better results, quality, safety, and satisfaction. Visit the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality website for tips.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce this publication and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to follow these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and the use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 866‑615‑6464 or email nimhinfo@nih.gov.NIMH website www.nimh.nih.govMedlinePlus (National Library of Medicine)https://medlineplus.gov (En español: https://medlineplus.gov/spanish)ClinicalTrials.govwww.clinicaltrials.gov (En español: https://salud.nih.gov/investigacion-clinica)National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or Toll-free: 866-615-NIMH (6464) TTY: 301-443-8431 or TTY Toll-free: 866-415-8051 Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.govU.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. QF 18-3679  Revised October 2018The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you feel that you have struggled throughout your life with poor concentration, inattention, impulsivity, or getting organized? Have you wondered whether you might have attention deficit/ hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)? Our society has become more aware of ADHD as a condition that affects adults as well as children, and there are many adults who struggle with this disorder. At the same time, other life stressors or mental health conditions can cause similar symptoms. Consider getting an evaluation from a psychiatrist or psychologist who has experience in diagnosing ADHD. Getting an evaluation can help you find the right answer to your struggles and identify the treatment you need to feel better.ADHD is defined as a persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes with functioning or development.ADHD begins in childhood and is considered a developmental disorder, but a person may not receive a diagnosis until adolescence or adulthood.To receive a diagnosis of ADHD as an adult:Several other mental health conditions commonly occur with ADHD, including conduct disorder, learning disorders, anxiety disorders, and depression.Some children with ADHD continue to have the condition as adults.Many adults who have ADHD don’t know it. These adults may feel that it is impossible to get organized, stick to a job, or remember to keep appointments. Daily tasks such as getting up in the morning, preparing to leave the house for work, arriving at work on time, and being productive on the job can be especially challenging for adults with undiagnosed ADHD. These adults may have a history of academic problems, problems at work, or difficult or failed relationships. Many have had multiple traffic accidents. Like teens, adults with ADHD may seem restless and may try to do several things at once, most of them unsuccessfully. They also tend to prefer "quick fixes," rather than taking the steps needed to achieve greater rewards.A person may not be diagnosed with ADHD until adulthood because the condition was not recognized by teachers or family at a younger age, the person has a mild form of ADHD, or he or she managed fairly without the demands of adulthood. However, it is common for young adults with undiagnosed ADHD to encounter academic problems in college because of the intense concentration required by higher education.Untreated ADHD in an adult can lead to significant problems with education, social and family situations and relationships, employment, self-esteem, and emotional health. It is never too late to recognize, diagnose, and treat ADHD and any other mental health condition that can commonly occur with it. Effective treatment can improve the lives of many adults and their families.A person with inattention often:A person with hyperactivity-impulsivity often:Some people with ADHD primarily have symptoms of inattention, while others have primarily symptoms of hyperactivity-impulsivity. Some people have symptoms in both categories.Problems with concentration and staying organized can be common for many busy adults; however, an adult who is impaired both at work and at home, or in social situations, is more likely to have ADHD.Scientists are not sure what causes ADHD, although many studies suggest that genes play a large role. Like many other illnesses, ADHD probably results from a combination of factors. In addition to genetics, researchers are looking at possible environmental factors and are studying how brain injuries, nutrition, and the social environment might contribute to ADHD.Adults who suspect they have ADHD should see a licensed mental health professional or doctor, such as a psychologist or psychiatrist who has experience diagnosing ADHD, for an evaluation.Stress, other mental health conditions, and physical conditions or illnesses can cause similar symptoms to those of ADHD. Some of these include:Therefore, a thorough evaluation will help the doctor find out what is causing the symptoms and recommend effective treatment.There is no one test that can diagnose ADHD. Mental health professionals use certain rating scales to determine if an adult meets the diagnostic criteria for ADHD.A thorough evaluation also includes looking at the person’s history of childhood behavior and school experiences. To obtain this information, the doctor may interview spouses or partners, parents, close friends, and other associates.The person may also undergo a physical exam and various psychological tests that evaluate working memory, executive functioning (abilities like planning and decision-making), and visual and spatial skills or reasoning. The evaluation will also look at the person’s mood and whether he or she struggles with other issues, such as anxiety, depression, or substance abuse. A person’s medical history is also important, as previous health problems, trauma, or injury can also be the cause of symptoms.Adults with ADHD can be treated with behavioral interventions, medication, or a combination of the two.MedicationsStimulants such as methylphenidate and amphetamines are the most common type of medication used for treating ADHD. In addition, a few nonstimulant medications are also available. Although not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) specifically for the treatment of ADHD, antidepressants are sometimes used to treat adults with ADHD. An adult who is offered a prescription for a stimulant for ADHD should tell his or her doctor about all other medications that he or she takes. Medications for common adult health problems, such as diabetes, high blood pressure, anxiety, and depression may interact badly with stimulants. In this case, a doctor can offer other medication options.For general information about stimulants and other medications used for treating mental disorders, see the NIMH Mental Health Medications webpage (http://www. nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/mental-health-medications/ index.shtml). The FDA website (http://www.fda.gov) has the latest information on medication approvals, warnings, and patient information guides.PsychotherapyPsychotherapy, including cognitive behavioral therapy, can help an adult with ADHD to become more aware of the deficit in attention and concentration and can provide the skills for improving organization and efficiency in daily tasks. It can also address feelings of low self-esteem and help adults with ADHD gain confidence, as well as control impulsive and risky behaviors. A professional counselor or therapist can also help an adult with ADHD learn how to organize his or her life and break large tasks down into smaller, more manageable steps.In addition to the benefits of psychotherapy, adults with ADHD can gain social support and better coping skills by talking with family, friends, and colleagues about their diagnosis. If the people in their lives are aware of their diagnosis, they will better understand their behavior. Psychotherapy for families and couples can help any relationship problems and teach everyone involved about ADHD. There are also support groups just for adults with ADHD.Some adults also find it helpful to obtain support from a professional life coach or ADHD coach who can help with a variety of skills to improve daily functioning.National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)  http://www.nimh.nih.govCenters for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/adhd/National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.gov U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES National Institutes of Health National Institute of Mental Health NIH Publication No. QF 16-3572The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDepression is a real illness. Treatment can help you live to the fullest extent possible, even when you have another illness.It is common to feel sad or discouraged after a heart attack, a cancer diagnosis, or if you are trying to manage a chronic condition like pain. You may be facing new limits on what you can do and feel anxious about treatment outcomes and the future. It may be hard to adapt to a new reality and to cope with the changes and ongoing treatment that come with the diagnosis. Your favorite activities, like hiking or gardening, may be harder to do.Temporary feelings of sadness are expected, but if these and other symptoms last longer than a couple of weeks, you may have depression. Depression affects your ability to carry on with daily life and to enjoy work, leisure, friends, and family. The health effects of depression go beyond mood—depression is a serious medical illness with many symptoms, including physical ones. Some symptoms of depression are:Remember: Depression is treatable—even if you have another medical illness or condition. For more information, see the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) booklet on Depression at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/depression/index.shtml.The same factors that increase risk of depression in otherwise healthy people also raise the risk in people with other medical illnesses. These risk factors include a personal or family history of depression or loss of family members to suicide.However, there are some risk factors directly related to having another illness. For example, conditions such as Parkinson’s disease and stroke cause changes in the brain. In some cases, these changes may have a direct role in depression. Illness-related anxiety and stress can also trigger symptoms of depression.Depression is common among people who have chronic illnesses such as the following:Sometimes, symptoms of depression may follow a recent medical diagnosis but lift as you adjust or as the other condition is treated. In other cases, certain medications used to treat the illness may trigger depression. Depression may persist, even as physical health improves.Research suggests that people who have depression and another medical illness tend to have more severe symptoms of both illnesses. They may have more difficulty adapting to their co-occurring illness and more medical costs than those who do not also have depression.It is not yet clear whether treatment of depression when another illness is present can improve physical health. However, it is still important to seek treatment. It can make a difference in day-to-day life if you are coping with a chronic or long-term illness.It may have come as no surprise that people with a medical illness or condition are more likely to suffer from depression. The reverse is also true: the risk of developing some physical illnesses is higher in people with depression.People with depression have an increased risk of cardiovascular disease, diabetes, stroke, and Alzheimer’s disease, for example. Research also suggests that people with depression are at higher risk for osteoporosis relative to others. The reasons are not yet clear. One factor with some of these illnesses is that many people with depression may have less access to good medical care. They may have a harder time caring for their health, for example, seeking care, taking prescribed medication, eating well, and exercising.Ongoing research is also exploring whether physiological changes seen in depression may play a role in increasing the risk of physical illness. In people with depression, scientists have found changes in the way several different systems in the body function, all of which can have an impact on physical health:It is not yet clear whether these changes, seen in depression, raise the risk of other medical illness. However, the negative impact of depression on mental health and everyday life is clear.Do not dismiss depression as a normal part of having a chronic illness. Effective treatment for depression is available and can help even if you have another medical illness or condition. If you or a loved one think you have depression, it is important to tell your health care provider and explore treatment options.You should also inform the health care provider about all treatments or medications you are already receiving, including treatment for depression (prescribed medications and dietary supplements). Sharing information can help avoid problems with multiple medications interfering with each other. It also helps the provider stay informed about your overall health and treatment issues.Recovery from depression takes time, but treatment can improve the quality of life even if you have a medical illness. Treatments for depression include:National Institute of Mental Health http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/depression/index.shtml En Español http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/espanol/depresion/index.shtmlFor more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at http://www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Institute of Mental Health NIH Publication No. 15-MH-8015The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDepression is a real illness. Treatment can help you live to the fullest extent possible, even when you have another illness.It is common to feel sad or discouraged after a heart attack, a cancer diagnosis, or if you are trying to manage a chronic condition like pain. You may be facing new limits on what you can do and feel anxious about treatment outcomes and the future. It may be hard to adapt to a new reality and to cope with the changes and ongoing treatment that come with the diagnosis. Your favorite activities, like hiking or gardening, may be harder to do.Temporary feelings of sadness are expected, but if these and other symptoms last longer than a couple of weeks, you may have depression. Depression affects your ability to carry on with daily life and to enjoy work, leisure, friends, and family. The health effects of depression go beyond mood—depression is a serious medical illness with many symptoms, including physical ones. Some symptoms of depression are:Remember: Depression is treatable—even if you have another medical illness or condition. For more information, see the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) booklet on Depression at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/depression/index.shtml.The same factors that increase risk of depression in otherwise healthy people also raise the risk in people with other medical illnesses. These risk factors include a personal or family history of depression or loss of family members to suicide.However, there are some risk factors directly related to having another illness. For example, conditions such as Parkinson’s disease and stroke cause changes in the brain. In some cases, these changes may have a direct role in depression. Illness-related anxiety and stress can also trigger symptoms of depression.Depression is common among people who have chronic illnesses such as the following:Sometimes, symptoms of depression may follow a recent medical diagnosis but lift as you adjust or as the other condition is treated. In other cases, certain medications used to treat the illness may trigger depression. Depression may persist, even as physical health improves.Research suggests that people who have depression and another medical illness tend to have more severe symptoms of both illnesses. They may have more difficulty adapting to their co-occurring illness and more medical costs than those who do not also have depression.It is not yet clear whether treatment of depression when another illness is present can improve physical health. However, it is still important to seek treatment. It can make a difference in day-to-day life if you are coping with a chronic or long-term illness.It may have come as no surprise that people with a medical illness or condition are more likely to suffer from depression. The reverse is also true: the risk of developing some physical illnesses is higher in people with depression.People with depression have an increased risk of cardiovascular disease, diabetes, stroke, and Alzheimer’s disease, for example. Research also suggests that people with depression are at higher risk for osteoporosis relative to others. The reasons are not yet clear. One factor with some of these illnesses is that many people with depression may have less access to good medical care. They may have a harder time caring for their health, for example, seeking care, taking prescribed medication, eating well, and exercising.Ongoing research is also exploring whether physiological changes seen in depression may play a role in increasing the risk of physical illness. In people with depression, scientists have found changes in the way several different systems in the body function, all of which can have an impact on physical health:It is not yet clear whether these changes, seen in depression, raise the risk of other medical illness. However, the negative impact of depression on mental health and everyday life is clear.Do not dismiss depression as a normal part of having a chronic illness. Effective treatment for depression is available and can help even if you have another medical illness or condition. If you or a loved one think you have depression, it is important to tell your health care provider and explore treatment options.You should also inform the health care provider about all treatments or medications you are already receiving, including treatment for depression (prescribed medications and dietary supplements). Sharing information can help avoid problems with multiple medications interfering with each other. It also helps the provider stay informed about your overall health and treatment issues.Recovery from depression takes time, but treatment can improve the quality of life even if you have a medical illness. Treatments for depression include:National Institute of Mental Health http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/depression/index.shtml En Español http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/espanol/depresion/index.shtmlFor more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at http://www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Institute of Mental Health NIH Publication No. 15-MH-8015The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDepression is a real illness. Treatment can help you live to the fullest extent possible, even when you have another illness.It is common to feel sad or discouraged after a heart attack, a cancer diagnosis, or if you are trying to manage a chronic condition like pain. You may be facing new limits on what you can do and feel anxious about treatment outcomes and the future. It may be hard to adapt to a new reality and to cope with the changes and ongoing treatment that come with the diagnosis. Your favorite activities, like hiking or gardening, may be harder to do.Temporary feelings of sadness are expected, but if these and other symptoms last longer than a couple of weeks, you may have depression. Depression affects your ability to carry on with daily life and to enjoy work, leisure, friends, and family. The health effects of depression go beyond mood—depression is a serious medical illness with many symptoms, including physical ones. Some symptoms of depression are:Remember: Depression is treatable—even if you have another medical illness or condition. For more information, see the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) booklet on Depression at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/depression/index.shtml.The same factors that increase risk of depression in otherwise healthy people also raise the risk in people with other medical illnesses. These risk factors include a personal or family history of depression or loss of family members to suicide.However, there are some risk factors directly related to having another illness. For example, conditions such as Parkinson’s disease and stroke cause changes in the brain. In some cases, these changes may have a direct role in depression. Illness-related anxiety and stress can also trigger symptoms of depression.Depression is common among people who have chronic illnesses such as the following:Sometimes, symptoms of depression may follow a recent medical diagnosis but lift as you adjust or as the other condition is treated. In other cases, certain medications used to treat the illness may trigger depression. Depression may persist, even as physical health improves.Research suggests that people who have depression and another medical illness tend to have more severe symptoms of both illnesses. They may have more difficulty adapting to their co-occurring illness and more medical costs than those who do not also have depression.It is not yet clear whether treatment of depression when another illness is present can improve physical health. However, it is still important to seek treatment. It can make a difference in day-to-day life if you are coping with a chronic or long-term illness.It may have come as no surprise that people with a medical illness or condition are more likely to suffer from depression. The reverse is also true: the risk of developing some physical illnesses is higher in people with depression.People with depression have an increased risk of cardiovascular disease, diabetes, stroke, and Alzheimer’s disease, for example. Research also suggests that people with depression are at higher risk for osteoporosis relative to others. The reasons are not yet clear. One factor with some of these illnesses is that many people with depression may have less access to good medical care. They may have a harder time caring for their health, for example, seeking care, taking prescribed medication, eating well, and exercising.Ongoing research is also exploring whether physiological changes seen in depression may play a role in increasing the risk of physical illness. In people with depression, scientists have found changes in the way several different systems in the body function, all of which can have an impact on physical health:It is not yet clear whether these changes, seen in depression, raise the risk of other medical illness. However, the negative impact of depression on mental health and everyday life is clear.Do not dismiss depression as a normal part of having a chronic illness. Effective treatment for depression is available and can help even if you have another medical illness or condition. If you or a loved one think you have depression, it is important to tell your health care provider and explore treatment options.You should also inform the health care provider about all treatments or medications you are already receiving, including treatment for depression (prescribed medications and dietary supplements). Sharing information can help avoid problems with multiple medications interfering with each other. It also helps the provider stay informed about your overall health and treatment issues.Recovery from depression takes time, but treatment can improve the quality of life even if you have a medical illness. Treatments for depression include:National Institute of Mental Health http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/depression/index.shtml En Español http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/espanol/depresion/index.shtmlFor more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at http://www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Institute of Mental Health NIH Publication No. 15-MH-8015The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDepression is a real illness. Treatment can help you live to the fullest extent possible, even when you have another illness.It is common to feel sad or discouraged after a heart attack, a cancer diagnosis, or if you are trying to manage a chronic condition like pain. You may be facing new limits on what you can do and feel anxious about treatment outcomes and the future. It may be hard to adapt to a new reality and to cope with the changes and ongoing treatment that come with the diagnosis. Your favorite activities, like hiking or gardening, may be harder to do.Temporary feelings of sadness are expected, but if these and other symptoms last longer than a couple of weeks, you may have depression. Depression affects your ability to carry on with daily life and to enjoy work, leisure, friends, and family. The health effects of depression go beyond mood—depression is a serious medical illness with many symptoms, including physical ones. Some symptoms of depression are:Remember: Depression is treatable—even if you have another medical illness or condition. For more information, see the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) booklet on Depression at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/depression/index.shtml.The same factors that increase risk of depression in otherwise healthy people also raise the risk in people with other medical illnesses. These risk factors include a personal or family history of depression or loss of family members to suicide.However, there are some risk factors directly related to having another illness. For example, conditions such as Parkinson’s disease and stroke cause changes in the brain. In some cases, these changes may have a direct role in depression. Illness-related anxiety and stress can also trigger symptoms of depression.Depression is common among people who have chronic illnesses such as the following:Sometimes, symptoms of depression may follow a recent medical diagnosis but lift as you adjust or as the other condition is treated. In other cases, certain medications used to treat the illness may trigger depression. Depression may persist, even as physical health improves.Research suggests that people who have depression and another medical illness tend to have more severe symptoms of both illnesses. They may have more difficulty adapting to their co-occurring illness and more medical costs than those who do not also have depression.It is not yet clear whether treatment of depression when another illness is present can improve physical health. However, it is still important to seek treatment. It can make a difference in day-to-day life if you are coping with a chronic or long-term illness.It may have come as no surprise that people with a medical illness or condition are more likely to suffer from depression. The reverse is also true: the risk of developing some physical illnesses is higher in people with depression.People with depression have an increased risk of cardiovascular disease, diabetes, stroke, and Alzheimer’s disease, for example. Research also suggests that people with depression are at higher risk for osteoporosis relative to others. The reasons are not yet clear. One factor with some of these illnesses is that many people with depression may have less access to good medical care. They may have a harder time caring for their health, for example, seeking care, taking prescribed medication, eating well, and exercising.Ongoing research is also exploring whether physiological changes seen in depression may play a role in increasing the risk of physical illness. In people with depression, scientists have found changes in the way several different systems in the body function, all of which can have an impact on physical health:It is not yet clear whether these changes, seen in depression, raise the risk of other medical illness. However, the negative impact of depression on mental health and everyday life is clear.Do not dismiss depression as a normal part of having a chronic illness. Effective treatment for depression is available and can help even if you have another medical illness or condition. If you or a loved one think you have depression, it is important to tell your health care provider and explore treatment options.You should also inform the health care provider about all treatments or medications you are already receiving, including treatment for depression (prescribed medications and dietary supplements). Sharing information can help avoid problems with multiple medications interfering with each other. It also helps the provider stay informed about your overall health and treatment issues.Recovery from depression takes time, but treatment can improve the quality of life even if you have a medical illness. Treatments for depression include:National Institute of Mental Health http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/depression/index.shtml En Español http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/espanol/depresion/index.shtmlFor more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at http://www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Institute of Mental Health NIH Publication No. 15-MH-8015The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuFeeling moody, sad, or grouchy? Who doesn’t once in a while? College is an exciting time, but it can also be very challenging. As a college student, you might be leaving home for the first time, learning to live independently, taking tough classes, meeting new people, and getting a lot less sleep. Small or large setbacks can seem like the end of the world, but these feelings usually pass with a little time.But if you have been feeling sad, hopeless, or irritable for at least 2 weeks, you might have depression. You’re not alone. Depression is the most common health problem for college students.1 You should know:Depression is a medical illness with many symptoms, including physical ones. Sadness is only a small part of depression. Some people with depression may not feel sadness at all, but be more irritable, or just lose interest in things they usually like to do. Depression interferes with your daily life and normal function. Don’t ignore or try to hide the symptoms. It is not a character flaw, and you can’t will it away.Yes. The most common depressive disorders include major depression (a discrete episode, clearly different from a person’s usual feeling and functioning), persistent depressive disorder (a chronic, low-grade depression that can get better or worse over time), and psychotic depression (the most severe, with delusions or hallucinations). Some people are vulnerable to depression in the winter (“seasonal affective disorder”), and some women report depression in the week or two prior to their menstrual period (“premenstrual dysphoric disorder”). You can learn about these and other types of depression at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/depression/index.shtml.If you have been experiencing any of the following signs and symptoms nearly every day for at least 2 weeks, you may have major (sometimes called “clinical”) depression:Not everyone who is depressed experiences every symptom. Some people experience only a few symptoms. Some people have many. If any of these symptoms is interfering with your functioning—or if you are having thoughts that life is not worth living or ideas of harming yourself—you should seek help immediately; it is not necessary to wait 2 weeks.Depression can occur at the same time as other health problems, such as anxiety, an eating disorder, or substance abuse. It can also co-occur with other medical conditions, such as diabetes or thyroid imbalance. Certain medications—for example, those for the treatment of severe acne—may cause side effects that contribute to depression; although some women are very sensitive to hormonal changes, modern birth control pills are not associated with depression for most users.If you have symptoms of depression that are getting in the way of your ability to function with your studies and your social life, ask for help. Depression can get better with care and treatment. Don’t wait for depression to go away by itself or think you can manage it all on your own, and don’t ignore how you’re feeling just because you think you can “explain” it. As a college student, you’re busy—but you need to make time to get help. If you don’t ask for help, depression may get worse and contribute to other health problems, while robbing you of the academic and social enjoyment and success that brought you to college in the first place. It can also lead to “self-medication” with high-risk behaviors with their own serious consequences, such as binge drinking and other substance abuse and having unsafe sex.Most colleges provide mental health services through counseling centers, student health centers, or both. Check out your college website for information. If you think you might have depression, start by making an appointment with a doctor or health care provider for a checkup. This can be a doctor or health care provider at your college’s student health services center, a doctor who is off-campus in your college town, or a doctor in your hometown. Your doctor can make sure that you do not have another health problem that is causing your depression.If your doctor finds that you do not have another health problem, he or she can discuss treatment options or refer you to a mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist, counselor, or psychologist. A mental health professional can give you a thorough evaluation and also treat your depression.If you have thoughts of wishing you were dead or of suicide, call a helpline, such as 1-800-273-TALK (8255), for free 24-hour help, call campus security or 911, or go to the nearest emergency room.Effective treatments for depression include talk therapy (also called psychotherapy), personalized for your situation, or a combination of talk therapy and medication. Early treatment is best.A therapist, such as a psychiatrist, a psychologist, a social worker, or counselor, can help you understand and manage your moods and feelings. You can talk out your emotions to someone who understands and supports you. You can also learn how to stop thinking negatively and start to look at the positives in life. This will help you build confidence and feel better about yourself as you begin to work with your therapist to find solutions to problems that may have seemed insurmountable when you were feeling depressed and maybe even hopeless. Research has shown that certain types of talk therapy or psychotherapy can help young adults deal with depression.These include:All therapies can be adapted to each person’s issues, for example, if depression is associated with an anxiety or eating disorder. Your college counseling center may offer both individual and group counseling. Many also offer workshops and outreach programs to support you.Read more about talk therapies at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/psychotherapies.If your doctor thinks you need medication to help your depression, he or she may prescribe an antidepressant. There are a number of antidepressants that have been widely studied and proven to help. If your doctor recommends medication, it is important to see your doctor regularly and tell him or her about any side effects and how you are feeling, especially if you start feeling worse or have thoughts of hurting yourself. Although the doctor will attempt to “match” the best medication for your depression, sometimes it takes a little “trial and error” to find the best choice. If you or a close family member has done well on a particular medication in the past, that can be a good predictor of success again.Always follow the directions of the doctor or health care provider when taking medication. You will need to take one or more regular doses of an antidepressant every day, and it may not take full effect for a few weeks. To avoid having depression return, most people continue taking medication for some months after they are feeling better. If your depression is long-lasting or comes back repeatedly, you may need to take antidepressants longer.Although all antidepressants can cause side effects, some are more likely to cause certain side effects than others. Tell your doctor if you are often “sensitive” to medication; starting with a low dose and increasing it slowly to a full therapeutic level is the best way to minimize adverse effects. You may need to try more than one antidepressant medicine before finding the one that improves your symptoms without causing side effects that are difficult to live with.Read more about medications for depression at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/mental-health-medications/mental-health-medications.shtml.Besides seeing a doctor and a counselor, you can also help your depression by being patient with yourself and good to yourself. Don’t expect to get better immediately, but you will feel yourself improving gradually over time.Remember that, by treating your depression, you are helping yourself succeed in college and after graduation.Depression is also a major risk factor for suicide. The following are some of the signs you might notice in yourself or a friend that may be reason for concern.If you are in crisis and need help, call this toll-free number, available 24 hours a day, every day: 1-800-273-TALK (8255). You will reach the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline, a service available to anyone. You may call for yourself or for someone you care about, and all calls are confidential. You can also visit the Lifeline’s website at http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org.If you know someone who is considering suicide, do not leave him or her alone. Try to get your friend or loved one to seek immediate help from his or her doctor, campus security, the student health service, or the nearest hospital emergency room, or call 911. Remove any access he or she may have to firearms or other potential tools for suicide, including medications. You can also call to seek help as soon as possible by calling the Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (8255).The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) website (http://www.nimh.nih.gov) provides information about various mental health disorders and mental health issues. On the website, you can also learn about the latest mental health research and news. The website is mobile-friendly. This means you can access the NIMH website anywhere, anytime, and on any device—from desktop computers to tablets and mobile phones.You can also follow NIMH on Twitter (@NIMHgov), YouTube, Facebook, Google+, and LinkedIn.NIMH sometimes hosts live Twitter chats and other social media events on various mental health issues. For more information about past and upcoming events, visit the NIMH website (http://www.nimh.nih.gov).U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES National Institutes of Health National Institute of Mental Health NIH Publication No. 15-42661Buchanan, J. L. (2012). Prevention of depression in the college student population: A review of the literature. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 26(1), 21–42. doi:10.1016/j.apnu.2011.03.003. Retrieved July 31, 2015, from  http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0883941711000379The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuFeeling moody, sad, or grouchy? Who doesn’t once in a while? College is an exciting time, but it can also be very challenging. As a college student, you might be leaving home for the first time, learning to live independently, taking tough classes, meeting new people, and getting a lot less sleep. Small or large setbacks can seem like the end of the world, but these feelings usually pass with a little time.But if you have been feeling sad, hopeless, or irritable for at least 2 weeks, you might have depression. You’re not alone. Depression is the most common health problem for college students.1 You should know:Depression is a medical illness with many symptoms, including physical ones. Sadness is only a small part of depression. Some people with depression may not feel sadness at all, but be more irritable, or just lose interest in things they usually like to do. Depression interferes with your daily life and normal function. Don’t ignore or try to hide the symptoms. It is not a character flaw, and you can’t will it away.Yes. The most common depressive disorders include major depression (a discrete episode, clearly different from a person’s usual feeling and functioning), persistent depressive disorder (a chronic, low-grade depression that can get better or worse over time), and psychotic depression (the most severe, with delusions or hallucinations). Some people are vulnerable to depression in the winter (“seasonal affective disorder”), and some women report depression in the week or two prior to their menstrual period (“premenstrual dysphoric disorder”). You can learn about these and other types of depression at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/depression/index.shtml.If you have been experiencing any of the following signs and symptoms nearly every day for at least 2 weeks, you may have major (sometimes called “clinical”) depression:Not everyone who is depressed experiences every symptom. Some people experience only a few symptoms. Some people have many. If any of these symptoms is interfering with your functioning—or if you are having thoughts that life is not worth living or ideas of harming yourself—you should seek help immediately; it is not necessary to wait 2 weeks.Depression can occur at the same time as other health problems, such as anxiety, an eating disorder, or substance abuse. It can also co-occur with other medical conditions, such as diabetes or thyroid imbalance. Certain medications—for example, those for the treatment of severe acne—may cause side effects that contribute to depression; although some women are very sensitive to hormonal changes, modern birth control pills are not associated with depression for most users.If you have symptoms of depression that are getting in the way of your ability to function with your studies and your social life, ask for help. Depression can get better with care and treatment. Don’t wait for depression to go away by itself or think you can manage it all on your own, and don’t ignore how you’re feeling just because you think you can “explain” it. As a college student, you’re busy—but you need to make time to get help. If you don’t ask for help, depression may get worse and contribute to other health problems, while robbing you of the academic and social enjoyment and success that brought you to college in the first place. It can also lead to “self-medication” with high-risk behaviors with their own serious consequences, such as binge drinking and other substance abuse and having unsafe sex.Most colleges provide mental health services through counseling centers, student health centers, or both. Check out your college website for information. If you think you might have depression, start by making an appointment with a doctor or health care provider for a checkup. This can be a doctor or health care provider at your college’s student health services center, a doctor who is off-campus in your college town, or a doctor in your hometown. Your doctor can make sure that you do not have another health problem that is causing your depression.If your doctor finds that you do not have another health problem, he or she can discuss treatment options or refer you to a mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist, counselor, or psychologist. A mental health professional can give you a thorough evaluation and also treat your depression.If you have thoughts of wishing you were dead or of suicide, call a helpline, such as 1-800-273-TALK (8255), for free 24-hour help, call campus security or 911, or go to the nearest emergency room.Effective treatments for depression include talk therapy (also called psychotherapy), personalized for your situation, or a combination of talk therapy and medication. Early treatment is best.A therapist, such as a psychiatrist, a psychologist, a social worker, or counselor, can help you understand and manage your moods and feelings. You can talk out your emotions to someone who understands and supports you. You can also learn how to stop thinking negatively and start to look at the positives in life. This will help you build confidence and feel better about yourself as you begin to work with your therapist to find solutions to problems that may have seemed insurmountable when you were feeling depressed and maybe even hopeless. Research has shown that certain types of talk therapy or psychotherapy can help young adults deal with depression.These include:All therapies can be adapted to each person’s issues, for example, if depression is associated with an anxiety or eating disorder. Your college counseling center may offer both individual and group counseling. Many also offer workshops and outreach programs to support you.Read more about talk therapies at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/psychotherapies.If your doctor thinks you need medication to help your depression, he or she may prescribe an antidepressant. There are a number of antidepressants that have been widely studied and proven to help. If your doctor recommends medication, it is important to see your doctor regularly and tell him or her about any side effects and how you are feeling, especially if you start feeling worse or have thoughts of hurting yourself. Although the doctor will attempt to “match” the best medication for your depression, sometimes it takes a little “trial and error” to find the best choice. If you or a close family member has done well on a particular medication in the past, that can be a good predictor of success again.Always follow the directions of the doctor or health care provider when taking medication. You will need to take one or more regular doses of an antidepressant every day, and it may not take full effect for a few weeks. To avoid having depression return, most people continue taking medication for some months after they are feeling better. If your depression is long-lasting or comes back repeatedly, you may need to take antidepressants longer.Although all antidepressants can cause side effects, some are more likely to cause certain side effects than others. Tell your doctor if you are often “sensitive” to medication; starting with a low dose and increasing it slowly to a full therapeutic level is the best way to minimize adverse effects. You may need to try more than one antidepressant medicine before finding the one that improves your symptoms without causing side effects that are difficult to live with.Read more about medications for depression at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/mental-health-medications/mental-health-medications.shtml.Besides seeing a doctor and a counselor, you can also help your depression by being patient with yourself and good to yourself. Don’t expect to get better immediately, but you will feel yourself improving gradually over time.Remember that, by treating your depression, you are helping yourself succeed in college and after graduation.Depression is also a major risk factor for suicide. The following are some of the signs you might notice in yourself or a friend that may be reason for concern.If you are in crisis and need help, call this toll-free number, available 24 hours a day, every day: 1-800-273-TALK (8255). You will reach the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline, a service available to anyone. You may call for yourself or for someone you care about, and all calls are confidential. You can also visit the Lifeline’s website at http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org.If you know someone who is considering suicide, do not leave him or her alone. Try to get your friend or loved one to seek immediate help from his or her doctor, campus security, the student health service, or the nearest hospital emergency room, or call 911. Remove any access he or she may have to firearms or other potential tools for suicide, including medications. You can also call to seek help as soon as possible by calling the Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (8255).The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) website (http://www.nimh.nih.gov) provides information about various mental health disorders and mental health issues. On the website, you can also learn about the latest mental health research and news. The website is mobile-friendly. This means you can access the NIMH website anywhere, anytime, and on any device—from desktop computers to tablets and mobile phones.You can also follow NIMH on Twitter (@NIMHgov), YouTube, Facebook, Google+, and LinkedIn.NIMH sometimes hosts live Twitter chats and other social media events on various mental health issues. For more information about past and upcoming events, visit the NIMH website (http://www.nimh.nih.gov).U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES National Institutes of Health National Institute of Mental Health NIH Publication No. 15-42661Buchanan, J. L. (2012). Prevention of depression in the college student population: A review of the literature. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 26(1), 21–42. doi:10.1016/j.apnu.2011.03.003. Retrieved July 31, 2015, from  http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0883941711000379The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuFeeling moody, sad, or grouchy? Who doesn’t once in a while? College is an exciting time, but it can also be very challenging. As a college student, you might be leaving home for the first time, learning to live independently, taking tough classes, meeting new people, and getting a lot less sleep. Small or large setbacks can seem like the end of the world, but these feelings usually pass with a little time.But if you have been feeling sad, hopeless, or irritable for at least 2 weeks, you might have depression. You’re not alone. Depression is the most common health problem for college students.1 You should know:Depression is a medical illness with many symptoms, including physical ones. Sadness is only a small part of depression. Some people with depression may not feel sadness at all, but be more irritable, or just lose interest in things they usually like to do. Depression interferes with your daily life and normal function. Don’t ignore or try to hide the symptoms. It is not a character flaw, and you can’t will it away.Yes. The most common depressive disorders include major depression (a discrete episode, clearly different from a person’s usual feeling and functioning), persistent depressive disorder (a chronic, low-grade depression that can get better or worse over time), and psychotic depression (the most severe, with delusions or hallucinations). Some people are vulnerable to depression in the winter (“seasonal affective disorder”), and some women report depression in the week or two prior to their menstrual period (“premenstrual dysphoric disorder”). You can learn about these and other types of depression at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/depression/index.shtml.If you have been experiencing any of the following signs and symptoms nearly every day for at least 2 weeks, you may have major (sometimes called “clinical”) depression:Not everyone who is depressed experiences every symptom. Some people experience only a few symptoms. Some people have many. If any of these symptoms is interfering with your functioning—or if you are having thoughts that life is not worth living or ideas of harming yourself—you should seek help immediately; it is not necessary to wait 2 weeks.Depression can occur at the same time as other health problems, such as anxiety, an eating disorder, or substance abuse. It can also co-occur with other medical conditions, such as diabetes or thyroid imbalance. Certain medications—for example, those for the treatment of severe acne—may cause side effects that contribute to depression; although some women are very sensitive to hormonal changes, modern birth control pills are not associated with depression for most users.If you have symptoms of depression that are getting in the way of your ability to function with your studies and your social life, ask for help. Depression can get better with care and treatment. Don’t wait for depression to go away by itself or think you can manage it all on your own, and don’t ignore how you’re feeling just because you think you can “explain” it. As a college student, you’re busy—but you need to make time to get help. If you don’t ask for help, depression may get worse and contribute to other health problems, while robbing you of the academic and social enjoyment and success that brought you to college in the first place. It can also lead to “self-medication” with high-risk behaviors with their own serious consequences, such as binge drinking and other substance abuse and having unsafe sex.Most colleges provide mental health services through counseling centers, student health centers, or both. Check out your college website for information. If you think you might have depression, start by making an appointment with a doctor or health care provider for a checkup. This can be a doctor or health care provider at your college’s student health services center, a doctor who is off-campus in your college town, or a doctor in your hometown. Your doctor can make sure that you do not have another health problem that is causing your depression.If your doctor finds that you do not have another health problem, he or she can discuss treatment options or refer you to a mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist, counselor, or psychologist. A mental health professional can give you a thorough evaluation and also treat your depression.If you have thoughts of wishing you were dead or of suicide, call a helpline, such as 1-800-273-TALK (8255), for free 24-hour help, call campus security or 911, or go to the nearest emergency room.Effective treatments for depression include talk therapy (also called psychotherapy), personalized for your situation, or a combination of talk therapy and medication. Early treatment is best.A therapist, such as a psychiatrist, a psychologist, a social worker, or counselor, can help you understand and manage your moods and feelings. You can talk out your emotions to someone who understands and supports you. You can also learn how to stop thinking negatively and start to look at the positives in life. This will help you build confidence and feel better about yourself as you begin to work with your therapist to find solutions to problems that may have seemed insurmountable when you were feeling depressed and maybe even hopeless. Research has shown that certain types of talk therapy or psychotherapy can help young adults deal with depression.These include:All therapies can be adapted to each person’s issues, for example, if depression is associated with an anxiety or eating disorder. Your college counseling center may offer both individual and group counseling. Many also offer workshops and outreach programs to support you.Read more about talk therapies at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/psychotherapies.If your doctor thinks you need medication to help your depression, he or she may prescribe an antidepressant. There are a number of antidepressants that have been widely studied and proven to help. If your doctor recommends medication, it is important to see your doctor regularly and tell him or her about any side effects and how you are feeling, especially if you start feeling worse or have thoughts of hurting yourself. Although the doctor will attempt to “match” the best medication for your depression, sometimes it takes a little “trial and error” to find the best choice. If you or a close family member has done well on a particular medication in the past, that can be a good predictor of success again.Always follow the directions of the doctor or health care provider when taking medication. You will need to take one or more regular doses of an antidepressant every day, and it may not take full effect for a few weeks. To avoid having depression return, most people continue taking medication for some months after they are feeling better. If your depression is long-lasting or comes back repeatedly, you may need to take antidepressants longer.Although all antidepressants can cause side effects, some are more likely to cause certain side effects than others. Tell your doctor if you are often “sensitive” to medication; starting with a low dose and increasing it slowly to a full therapeutic level is the best way to minimize adverse effects. You may need to try more than one antidepressant medicine before finding the one that improves your symptoms without causing side effects that are difficult to live with.Read more about medications for depression at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/mental-health-medications/mental-health-medications.shtml.Besides seeing a doctor and a counselor, you can also help your depression by being patient with yourself and good to yourself. Don’t expect to get better immediately, but you will feel yourself improving gradually over time.Remember that, by treating your depression, you are helping yourself succeed in college and after graduation.Depression is also a major risk factor for suicide. The following are some of the signs you might notice in yourself or a friend that may be reason for concern.If you are in crisis and need help, call this toll-free number, available 24 hours a day, every day: 1-800-273-TALK (8255). You will reach the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline, a service available to anyone. You may call for yourself or for someone you care about, and all calls are confidential. You can also visit the Lifeline’s website at http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org.If you know someone who is considering suicide, do not leave him or her alone. Try to get your friend or loved one to seek immediate help from his or her doctor, campus security, the student health service, or the nearest hospital emergency room, or call 911. Remove any access he or she may have to firearms or other potential tools for suicide, including medications. You can also call to seek help as soon as possible by calling the Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (8255).The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) website (http://www.nimh.nih.gov) provides information about various mental health disorders and mental health issues. On the website, you can also learn about the latest mental health research and news. The website is mobile-friendly. This means you can access the NIMH website anywhere, anytime, and on any device—from desktop computers to tablets and mobile phones.You can also follow NIMH on Twitter (@NIMHgov), YouTube, Facebook, Google+, and LinkedIn.NIMH sometimes hosts live Twitter chats and other social media events on various mental health issues. For more information about past and upcoming events, visit the NIMH website (http://www.nimh.nih.gov).U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES National Institutes of Health National Institute of Mental Health NIH Publication No. 15-42661Buchanan, J. L. (2012). Prevention of depression in the college student population: A review of the literature. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 26(1), 21–42. doi:10.1016/j.apnu.2011.03.003. Retrieved July 31, 2015, from  http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0883941711000379The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuFeeling moody, sad, or grouchy? Who doesn’t once in a while? College is an exciting time, but it can also be very challenging. As a college student, you might be leaving home for the first time, learning to live independently, taking tough classes, meeting new people, and getting a lot less sleep. Small or large setbacks can seem like the end of the world, but these feelings usually pass with a little time.But if you have been feeling sad, hopeless, or irritable for at least 2 weeks, you might have depression. You’re not alone. Depression is the most common health problem for college students.1 You should know:Depression is a medical illness with many symptoms, including physical ones. Sadness is only a small part of depression. Some people with depression may not feel sadness at all, but be more irritable, or just lose interest in things they usually like to do. Depression interferes with your daily life and normal function. Don’t ignore or try to hide the symptoms. It is not a character flaw, and you can’t will it away.Yes. The most common depressive disorders include major depression (a discrete episode, clearly different from a person’s usual feeling and functioning), persistent depressive disorder (a chronic, low-grade depression that can get better or worse over time), and psychotic depression (the most severe, with delusions or hallucinations). Some people are vulnerable to depression in the winter (“seasonal affective disorder”), and some women report depression in the week or two prior to their menstrual period (“premenstrual dysphoric disorder”). You can learn about these and other types of depression at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/depression/index.shtml.If you have been experiencing any of the following signs and symptoms nearly every day for at least 2 weeks, you may have major (sometimes called “clinical”) depression:Not everyone who is depressed experiences every symptom. Some people experience only a few symptoms. Some people have many. If any of these symptoms is interfering with your functioning—or if you are having thoughts that life is not worth living or ideas of harming yourself—you should seek help immediately; it is not necessary to wait 2 weeks.Depression can occur at the same time as other health problems, such as anxiety, an eating disorder, or substance abuse. It can also co-occur with other medical conditions, such as diabetes or thyroid imbalance. Certain medications—for example, those for the treatment of severe acne—may cause side effects that contribute to depression; although some women are very sensitive to hormonal changes, modern birth control pills are not associated with depression for most users.If you have symptoms of depression that are getting in the way of your ability to function with your studies and your social life, ask for help. Depression can get better with care and treatment. Don’t wait for depression to go away by itself or think you can manage it all on your own, and don’t ignore how you’re feeling just because you think you can “explain” it. As a college student, you’re busy—but you need to make time to get help. If you don’t ask for help, depression may get worse and contribute to other health problems, while robbing you of the academic and social enjoyment and success that brought you to college in the first place. It can also lead to “self-medication” with high-risk behaviors with their own serious consequences, such as binge drinking and other substance abuse and having unsafe sex.Most colleges provide mental health services through counseling centers, student health centers, or both. Check out your college website for information. If you think you might have depression, start by making an appointment with a doctor or health care provider for a checkup. This can be a doctor or health care provider at your college’s student health services center, a doctor who is off-campus in your college town, or a doctor in your hometown. Your doctor can make sure that you do not have another health problem that is causing your depression.If your doctor finds that you do not have another health problem, he or she can discuss treatment options or refer you to a mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist, counselor, or psychologist. A mental health professional can give you a thorough evaluation and also treat your depression.If you have thoughts of wishing you were dead or of suicide, call a helpline, such as 1-800-273-TALK (8255), for free 24-hour help, call campus security or 911, or go to the nearest emergency room.Effective treatments for depression include talk therapy (also called psychotherapy), personalized for your situation, or a combination of talk therapy and medication. Early treatment is best.A therapist, such as a psychiatrist, a psychologist, a social worker, or counselor, can help you understand and manage your moods and feelings. You can talk out your emotions to someone who understands and supports you. You can also learn how to stop thinking negatively and start to look at the positives in life. This will help you build confidence and feel better about yourself as you begin to work with your therapist to find solutions to problems that may have seemed insurmountable when you were feeling depressed and maybe even hopeless. Research has shown that certain types of talk therapy or psychotherapy can help young adults deal with depression.These include:All therapies can be adapted to each person’s issues, for example, if depression is associated with an anxiety or eating disorder. Your college counseling center may offer both individual and group counseling. Many also offer workshops and outreach programs to support you.Read more about talk therapies at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/psychotherapies.If your doctor thinks you need medication to help your depression, he or she may prescribe an antidepressant. There are a number of antidepressants that have been widely studied and proven to help. If your doctor recommends medication, it is important to see your doctor regularly and tell him or her about any side effects and how you are feeling, especially if you start feeling worse or have thoughts of hurting yourself. Although the doctor will attempt to “match” the best medication for your depression, sometimes it takes a little “trial and error” to find the best choice. If you or a close family member has done well on a particular medication in the past, that can be a good predictor of success again.Always follow the directions of the doctor or health care provider when taking medication. You will need to take one or more regular doses of an antidepressant every day, and it may not take full effect for a few weeks. To avoid having depression return, most people continue taking medication for some months after they are feeling better. If your depression is long-lasting or comes back repeatedly, you may need to take antidepressants longer.Although all antidepressants can cause side effects, some are more likely to cause certain side effects than others. Tell your doctor if you are often “sensitive” to medication; starting with a low dose and increasing it slowly to a full therapeutic level is the best way to minimize adverse effects. You may need to try more than one antidepressant medicine before finding the one that improves your symptoms without causing side effects that are difficult to live with.Read more about medications for depression at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/mental-health-medications/mental-health-medications.shtml.Besides seeing a doctor and a counselor, you can also help your depression by being patient with yourself and good to yourself. Don’t expect to get better immediately, but you will feel yourself improving gradually over time.Remember that, by treating your depression, you are helping yourself succeed in college and after graduation.Depression is also a major risk factor for suicide. The following are some of the signs you might notice in yourself or a friend that may be reason for concern.If you are in crisis and need help, call this toll-free number, available 24 hours a day, every day: 1-800-273-TALK (8255). You will reach the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline, a service available to anyone. You may call for yourself or for someone you care about, and all calls are confidential. You can also visit the Lifeline’s website at http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org.If you know someone who is considering suicide, do not leave him or her alone. Try to get your friend or loved one to seek immediate help from his or her doctor, campus security, the student health service, or the nearest hospital emergency room, or call 911. Remove any access he or she may have to firearms or other potential tools for suicide, including medications. You can also call to seek help as soon as possible by calling the Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (8255).The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) website (http://www.nimh.nih.gov) provides information about various mental health disorders and mental health issues. On the website, you can also learn about the latest mental health research and news. The website is mobile-friendly. This means you can access the NIMH website anywhere, anytime, and on any device—from desktop computers to tablets and mobile phones.You can also follow NIMH on Twitter (@NIMHgov), YouTube, Facebook, Google+, and LinkedIn.NIMH sometimes hosts live Twitter chats and other social media events on various mental health issues. For more information about past and upcoming events, visit the NIMH website (http://www.nimh.nih.gov).U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES National Institutes of Health National Institute of Mental Health NIH Publication No. 15-42661Buchanan, J. L. (2012). Prevention of depression in the college student population: A review of the literature. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 26(1), 21–42. doi:10.1016/j.apnu.2011.03.003. Retrieved July 31, 2015, from  http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0883941711000379The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDepression is a real illness. Treatment can help you live to the fullest extent possible, even when you have another illness.It is common to feel sad or discouraged after a heart attack, a cancer diagnosis, or if you are trying to manage a chronic condition like pain. You may be facing new limits on what you can do and feel anxious about treatment outcomes and the future. It may be hard to adapt to a new reality and to cope with the changes and ongoing treatment that come with the diagnosis. Your favorite activities, like hiking or gardening, may be harder to do.Temporary feelings of sadness are expected, but if these and other symptoms last longer than a couple of weeks, you may have depression. Depression affects your ability to carry on with daily life and to enjoy work, leisure, friends, and family. The health effects of depression go beyond mood—depression is a serious medical illness with many symptoms, including physical ones. Some symptoms of depression are:Remember: Depression is treatable—even if you have another medical illness or condition. For more information, see the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) booklet on Depression at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/depression/index.shtml.The same factors that increase risk of depression in otherwise healthy people also raise the risk in people with other medical illnesses. These risk factors include a personal or family history of depression or loss of family members to suicide.However, there are some risk factors directly related to having another illness. For example, conditions such as Parkinson’s disease and stroke cause changes in the brain. In some cases, these changes may have a direct role in depression. Illness-related anxiety and stress can also trigger symptoms of depression.Depression is common among people who have chronic illnesses such as the following:Sometimes, symptoms of depression may follow a recent medical diagnosis but lift as you adjust or as the other condition is treated. In other cases, certain medications used to treat the illness may trigger depression. Depression may persist, even as physical health improves.Research suggests that people who have depression and another medical illness tend to have more severe symptoms of both illnesses. They may have more difficulty adapting to their co-occurring illness and more medical costs than those who do not also have depression.It is not yet clear whether treatment of depression when another illness is present can improve physical health. However, it is still important to seek treatment. It can make a difference in day-to-day life if you are coping with a chronic or long-term illness.It may have come as no surprise that people with a medical illness or condition are more likely to suffer from depression. The reverse is also true: the risk of developing some physical illnesses is higher in people with depression.People with depression have an increased risk of cardiovascular disease, diabetes, stroke, and Alzheimer’s disease, for example. Research also suggests that people with depression are at higher risk for osteoporosis relative to others. The reasons are not yet clear. One factor with some of these illnesses is that many people with depression may have less access to good medical care. They may have a harder time caring for their health, for example, seeking care, taking prescribed medication, eating well, and exercising.Ongoing research is also exploring whether physiological changes seen in depression may play a role in increasing the risk of physical illness. In people with depression, scientists have found changes in the way several different systems in the body function, all of which can have an impact on physical health:It is not yet clear whether these changes, seen in depression, raise the risk of other medical illness. However, the negative impact of depression on mental health and everyday life is clear.Do not dismiss depression as a normal part of having a chronic illness. Effective treatment for depression is available and can help even if you have another medical illness or condition. If you or a loved one think you have depression, it is important to tell your health care provider and explore treatment options.You should also inform the health care provider about all treatments or medications you are already receiving, including treatment for depression (prescribed medications and dietary supplements). Sharing information can help avoid problems with multiple medications interfering with each other. It also helps the provider stay informed about your overall health and treatment issues.Recovery from depression takes time, but treatment can improve the quality of life even if you have a medical illness. Treatments for depression include:National Institute of Mental Health http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/depression/index.shtml En Español http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/espanol/depresion/index.shtmlFor more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at http://www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Institute of Mental Health NIH Publication No. 15-MH-8015The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDepression is a real illness. Treatment can help you live to the fullest extent possible, even when you have another illness.It is common to feel sad or discouraged after a heart attack, a cancer diagnosis, or if you are trying to manage a chronic condition like pain. You may be facing new limits on what you can do and feel anxious about treatment outcomes and the future. It may be hard to adapt to a new reality and to cope with the changes and ongoing treatment that come with the diagnosis. Your favorite activities, like hiking or gardening, may be harder to do.Temporary feelings of sadness are expected, but if these and other symptoms last longer than a couple of weeks, you may have depression. Depression affects your ability to carry on with daily life and to enjoy work, leisure, friends, and family. The health effects of depression go beyond mood—depression is a serious medical illness with many symptoms, including physical ones. Some symptoms of depression are:Remember: Depression is treatable—even if you have another medical illness or condition. For more information, see the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) booklet on Depression at http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/depression/index.shtml.The same factors that increase risk of depression in otherwise healthy people also raise the risk in people with other medical illnesses. These risk factors include a personal or family history of depression or loss of family members to suicide.However, there are some risk factors directly related to having another illness. For example, conditions such as Parkinson’s disease and stroke cause changes in the brain. In some cases, these changes may have a direct role in depression. Illness-related anxiety and stress can also trigger symptoms of depression.Depression is common among people who have chronic illnesses such as the following:Sometimes, symptoms of depression may follow a recent medical diagnosis but lift as you adjust or as the other condition is treated. In other cases, certain medications used to treat the illness may trigger depression. Depression may persist, even as physical health improves.Research suggests that people who have depression and another medical illness tend to have more severe symptoms of both illnesses. They may have more difficulty adapting to their co-occurring illness and more medical costs than those who do not also have depression.It is not yet clear whether treatment of depression when another illness is present can improve physical health. However, it is still important to seek treatment. It can make a difference in day-to-day life if you are coping with a chronic or long-term illness.It may have come as no surprise that people with a medical illness or condition are more likely to suffer from depression. The reverse is also true: the risk of developing some physical illnesses is higher in people with depression.People with depression have an increased risk of cardiovascular disease, diabetes, stroke, and Alzheimer’s disease, for example. Research also suggests that people with depression are at higher risk for osteoporosis relative to others. The reasons are not yet clear. One factor with some of these illnesses is that many people with depression may have less access to good medical care. They may have a harder time caring for their health, for example, seeking care, taking prescribed medication, eating well, and exercising.Ongoing research is also exploring whether physiological changes seen in depression may play a role in increasing the risk of physical illness. In people with depression, scientists have found changes in the way several different systems in the body function, all of which can have an impact on physical health:It is not yet clear whether these changes, seen in depression, raise the risk of other medical illness. However, the negative impact of depression on mental health and everyday life is clear.Do not dismiss depression as a normal part of having a chronic illness. Effective treatment for depression is available and can help even if you have another medical illness or condition. If you or a loved one think you have depression, it is important to tell your health care provider and explore treatment options.You should also inform the health care provider about all treatments or medications you are already receiving, including treatment for depression (prescribed medications and dietary supplements). Sharing information can help avoid problems with multiple medications interfering with each other. It also helps the provider stay informed about your overall health and treatment issues.Recovery from depression takes time, but treatment can improve the quality of life even if you have a medical illness. Treatments for depression include:National Institute of Mental Health http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/depression/index.shtml En Español http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/espanol/depresion/index.shtmlFor more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at http://www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health National Institute of Mental Health NIH Publication No. 15-MH-8015The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you feel sad, empty, and hopeless most of the day, nearly every day? Have you lost interest or pleasure in your hobbies or being with friends and family? Are you having trouble sleeping, eating, and functioning? If you have felt this way for at least 2 weeks, you may have depression, a serious but treatable mood disorder.Everyone feels sad or low sometimes, but these feelings usually pass with a little time. Depression—also called “clinical depression” or a “depressive disorder”—is a mood disorder that causes distressing symptoms that affect how you feel, think, and handle daily activities, such as sleeping, eating, or working. To be diagnosed with depression, symptoms must be present most of the day, nearly every day for at least 2 weeks.Two of the most common forms of depression are:Some forms of depression are slightly different, or they may develop under unique circumstances, such as:Other examples of depressive disorders include disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (diagnosed in children and adolescents) and premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Depression can also be one phase of bipolar disorder (formerly called manic-depression). But a person with bipolar disorder also experiences extreme high—euphoric or irritable —moods called “mania” or a less severe form called “hypomania.”You can learn more about these disorders on the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)’s website (www.nimh.nih.gov).Scientists at NIMH and across the country are studying the causes of depression. Research suggests that a combination of genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors play a role in depression.Depression can occur along with other serious illnesses, such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and Parkinson’s disease. Depression can make these conditions worse and vice versa. Sometimes medications taken for these illnesses may cause side effects that contribute to depression symptoms. For more information on ongoing research on depression, visit www.nimh.nih.gov.Sadness is only one small part of depression and some people with depression may not feel sadness at all. Different people have different symptoms. Some symptoms of depression include:No. Depression affects different people in different ways. For example:Women have depression more often than men. Biological, lifecycle, and hormonal factors that are unique to women may be linked to their higher depression rate. Women with depression typically have symptoms of sadness, worthlessness, and guilt.Men with depression are more likely to be very tired, irritable, and sometimes angry. They may lose interest in work or activities they once enjoyed, have sleep problems, and behave recklessly, including the misuse of drugs or alcohol. Many men do not recognize their depression and fail to seek help.Older adults with depression may have less obvious symptoms, or they may be less likely to admit to feelings of sadness or grief. They are also more likely to have medical conditions, such as heart disease, which may cause or contribute to depression.Younger children with depression may pretend to be sick, refuse to go to school, cling to a parent, or worry that a parent may die.Older children and teens with depression may get into trouble at school, sulk, and be irritable. Teens with depression may have symptoms of other disorders, such as anxiety, eating disorders, or substance abuse.The first step in getting the right treatment is to visit a health care provider or mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist. Your health care provider can do an exam, interview, and lab tests to rule out other health conditions that may have the same symptoms as depression. Once diagnosed, depression can be treated with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. If these treatments do not reduce symptoms, brain stimulation therapy may be another treatment option to explore.Medications called antidepressants can work well to treat depression. They can take 2 to 4 weeks to work. Antidepressants can have side effects, but many side effects may lessen over time. Talk to your health care provider about any side effects that you have. Do not stop taking your antidepressant without first talking to your health care provider.Please Note: Although antidepressants can be effective for many people, they may present serious risks to some, especially children, teens, and young adults. Antidepressants may cause some people, especially those who become agitated when they first start taking the medication and before it begins to work, to have suicidal thoughts or make suicide attempts. Anyone taking antidepressants should be monitored closely, especially when they first start taking them. For most people, though, the risks of untreated depression far outweigh those of antidepressant medications when they are used under a doctor’s careful supervision.Information about medications changes frequently. Visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website for the latest warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Psychotherapy helps by teaching new ways of thinking and behaving, and changing habits that may be contributing to depression. Therapy can help you understand and work through difficult relationships or situations that may be causing your depression or making it worse.Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and other brain stimulation therapies may be an option for people with severe depression who do not respond to antidepressant medications. ECT is the best studied brain stimulation therapy and has the longest history of use. Other stimulation therapies discussed here are newer, and in some cases still experimental methods. For more information on these treatment options, visit www.nimh.nih.gov/health. To find clinical trials, visit www.clinicaltrials.gov.As you continue treatment, you may start to feel better gradually. Remember that if you are taking an antidepressant, it may take 2 to 4 weeks to start working. Try to do things that you used to enjoy. Go easy on yourself. Other things that may help include:If you know someone who has depression, first help him or her see a health care provider or mental health professional. You can also:If you are unsure where to go for help, ask your health provider or check out the NIMH Help for Mental Illnesses webpage at www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp. Another Federal health agency, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), maintains an online Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator at https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov/. You can also check online for mental health professionals; contact your community health center, local mental health association, or insurance plan to find a mental health professional. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to use these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or e-mail nimhinfo@nih.gov.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service (www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/) has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. TR 16-3561 Revised 2016The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you feel sad, empty, and hopeless most of the day, nearly every day? Have you lost interest or pleasure in your hobbies or being with friends and family? Are you having trouble sleeping, eating, and functioning? If you have felt this way for at least 2 weeks, you may have depression, a serious but treatable mood disorder.Everyone feels sad or low sometimes, but these feelings usually pass with a little time. Depression—also called “clinical depression” or a “depressive disorder”—is a mood disorder that causes distressing symptoms that affect how you feel, think, and handle daily activities, such as sleeping, eating, or working. To be diagnosed with depression, symptoms must be present most of the day, nearly every day for at least 2 weeks.Two of the most common forms of depression are:Some forms of depression are slightly different, or they may develop under unique circumstances, such as:Other examples of depressive disorders include disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (diagnosed in children and adolescents) and premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Depression can also be one phase of bipolar disorder (formerly called manic-depression). But a person with bipolar disorder also experiences extreme high—euphoric or irritable —moods called “mania” or a less severe form called “hypomania.”You can learn more about these disorders on the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)’s website (www.nimh.nih.gov).Scientists at NIMH and across the country are studying the causes of depression. Research suggests that a combination of genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors play a role in depression.Depression can occur along with other serious illnesses, such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and Parkinson’s disease. Depression can make these conditions worse and vice versa. Sometimes medications taken for these illnesses may cause side effects that contribute to depression symptoms. For more information on ongoing research on depression, visit www.nimh.nih.gov.Sadness is only one small part of depression and some people with depression may not feel sadness at all. Different people have different symptoms. Some symptoms of depression include:No. Depression affects different people in different ways. For example:Women have depression more often than men. Biological, lifecycle, and hormonal factors that are unique to women may be linked to their higher depression rate. Women with depression typically have symptoms of sadness, worthlessness, and guilt.Men with depression are more likely to be very tired, irritable, and sometimes angry. They may lose interest in work or activities they once enjoyed, have sleep problems, and behave recklessly, including the misuse of drugs or alcohol. Many men do not recognize their depression and fail to seek help.Older adults with depression may have less obvious symptoms, or they may be less likely to admit to feelings of sadness or grief. They are also more likely to have medical conditions, such as heart disease, which may cause or contribute to depression.Younger children with depression may pretend to be sick, refuse to go to school, cling to a parent, or worry that a parent may die.Older children and teens with depression may get into trouble at school, sulk, and be irritable. Teens with depression may have symptoms of other disorders, such as anxiety, eating disorders, or substance abuse.The first step in getting the right treatment is to visit a health care provider or mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist. Your health care provider can do an exam, interview, and lab tests to rule out other health conditions that may have the same symptoms as depression. Once diagnosed, depression can be treated with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. If these treatments do not reduce symptoms, brain stimulation therapy may be another treatment option to explore.Medications called antidepressants can work well to treat depression. They can take 2 to 4 weeks to work. Antidepressants can have side effects, but many side effects may lessen over time. Talk to your health care provider about any side effects that you have. Do not stop taking your antidepressant without first talking to your health care provider.Please Note: Although antidepressants can be effective for many people, they may present serious risks to some, especially children, teens, and young adults. Antidepressants may cause some people, especially those who become agitated when they first start taking the medication and before it begins to work, to have suicidal thoughts or make suicide attempts. Anyone taking antidepressants should be monitored closely, especially when they first start taking them. For most people, though, the risks of untreated depression far outweigh those of antidepressant medications when they are used under a doctor’s careful supervision.Information about medications changes frequently. Visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website for the latest warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Psychotherapy helps by teaching new ways of thinking and behaving, and changing habits that may be contributing to depression. Therapy can help you understand and work through difficult relationships or situations that may be causing your depression or making it worse.Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and other brain stimulation therapies may be an option for people with severe depression who do not respond to antidepressant medications. ECT is the best studied brain stimulation therapy and has the longest history of use. Other stimulation therapies discussed here are newer, and in some cases still experimental methods. For more information on these treatment options, visit www.nimh.nih.gov/health. To find clinical trials, visit www.clinicaltrials.gov.As you continue treatment, you may start to feel better gradually. Remember that if you are taking an antidepressant, it may take 2 to 4 weeks to start working. Try to do things that you used to enjoy. Go easy on yourself. Other things that may help include:If you know someone who has depression, first help him or her see a health care provider or mental health professional. You can also:If you are unsure where to go for help, ask your health provider or check out the NIMH Help for Mental Illnesses webpage at www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp. Another Federal health agency, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), maintains an online Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator at https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov/. You can also check online for mental health professionals; contact your community health center, local mental health association, or insurance plan to find a mental health professional. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to use these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or e-mail nimhinfo@nih.gov.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service (www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/) has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. TR 16-3561 Revised 2016The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
HTTP Error 400. The request URL is invalid.
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you feel sad, empty, and hopeless most of the day, nearly every day? Have you lost interest or pleasure in your hobbies or being with friends and family? Are you having trouble sleeping, eating, and functioning? If you have felt this way for at least 2 weeks, you may have depression, a serious but treatable mood disorder.Everyone feels sad or low sometimes, but these feelings usually pass with a little time. Depression—also called “clinical depression” or a “depressive disorder”—is a mood disorder that causes distressing symptoms that affect how you feel, think, and handle daily activities, such as sleeping, eating, or working. To be diagnosed with depression, symptoms must be present most of the day, nearly every day for at least 2 weeks.Two of the most common forms of depression are:Some forms of depression are slightly different, or they may develop under unique circumstances, such as:Other examples of depressive disorders include disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (diagnosed in children and adolescents) and premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Depression can also be one phase of bipolar disorder (formerly called manic-depression). But a person with bipolar disorder also experiences extreme high—euphoric or irritable —moods called “mania” or a less severe form called “hypomania.”You can learn more about these disorders on the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)’s website (www.nimh.nih.gov).Scientists at NIMH and across the country are studying the causes of depression. Research suggests that a combination of genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors play a role in depression.Depression can occur along with other serious illnesses, such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and Parkinson’s disease. Depression can make these conditions worse and vice versa. Sometimes medications taken for these illnesses may cause side effects that contribute to depression symptoms. For more information on ongoing research on depression, visit www.nimh.nih.gov.Sadness is only one small part of depression and some people with depression may not feel sadness at all. Different people have different symptoms. Some symptoms of depression include:No. Depression affects different people in different ways. For example:Women have depression more often than men. Biological, lifecycle, and hormonal factors that are unique to women may be linked to their higher depression rate. Women with depression typically have symptoms of sadness, worthlessness, and guilt.Men with depression are more likely to be very tired, irritable, and sometimes angry. They may lose interest in work or activities they once enjoyed, have sleep problems, and behave recklessly, including the misuse of drugs or alcohol. Many men do not recognize their depression and fail to seek help.Older adults with depression may have less obvious symptoms, or they may be less likely to admit to feelings of sadness or grief. They are also more likely to have medical conditions, such as heart disease, which may cause or contribute to depression.Younger children with depression may pretend to be sick, refuse to go to school, cling to a parent, or worry that a parent may die.Older children and teens with depression may get into trouble at school, sulk, and be irritable. Teens with depression may have symptoms of other disorders, such as anxiety, eating disorders, or substance abuse.The first step in getting the right treatment is to visit a health care provider or mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist. Your health care provider can do an exam, interview, and lab tests to rule out other health conditions that may have the same symptoms as depression. Once diagnosed, depression can be treated with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. If these treatments do not reduce symptoms, brain stimulation therapy may be another treatment option to explore.Medications called antidepressants can work well to treat depression. They can take 2 to 4 weeks to work. Antidepressants can have side effects, but many side effects may lessen over time. Talk to your health care provider about any side effects that you have. Do not stop taking your antidepressant without first talking to your health care provider.Please Note: Although antidepressants can be effective for many people, they may present serious risks to some, especially children, teens, and young adults. Antidepressants may cause some people, especially those who become agitated when they first start taking the medication and before it begins to work, to have suicidal thoughts or make suicide attempts. Anyone taking antidepressants should be monitored closely, especially when they first start taking them. For most people, though, the risks of untreated depression far outweigh those of antidepressant medications when they are used under a doctor’s careful supervision.Information about medications changes frequently. Visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website for the latest warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Psychotherapy helps by teaching new ways of thinking and behaving, and changing habits that may be contributing to depression. Therapy can help you understand and work through difficult relationships or situations that may be causing your depression or making it worse.Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and other brain stimulation therapies may be an option for people with severe depression who do not respond to antidepressant medications. ECT is the best studied brain stimulation therapy and has the longest history of use. Other stimulation therapies discussed here are newer, and in some cases still experimental methods. For more information on these treatment options, visit www.nimh.nih.gov/health. To find clinical trials, visit www.clinicaltrials.gov.As you continue treatment, you may start to feel better gradually. Remember that if you are taking an antidepressant, it may take 2 to 4 weeks to start working. Try to do things that you used to enjoy. Go easy on yourself. Other things that may help include:If you know someone who has depression, first help him or her see a health care provider or mental health professional. You can also:If you are unsure where to go for help, ask your health provider or check out the NIMH Help for Mental Illnesses webpage at www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp. Another Federal health agency, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), maintains an online Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator at https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov/. You can also check online for mental health professionals; contact your community health center, local mental health association, or insurance plan to find a mental health professional. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to use these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or e-mail nimhinfo@nih.gov.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service (www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/) has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. TR 16-3561 Revised 2016The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you feel sad, empty, and hopeless most of the day, nearly every day? Have you lost interest or pleasure in your hobbies or being with friends and family? Are you having trouble sleeping, eating, and functioning? If you have felt this way for at least 2 weeks, you may have depression, a serious but treatable mood disorder.Everyone feels sad or low sometimes, but these feelings usually pass with a little time. Depression—also called “clinical depression” or a “depressive disorder”—is a mood disorder that causes distressing symptoms that affect how you feel, think, and handle daily activities, such as sleeping, eating, or working. To be diagnosed with depression, symptoms must be present most of the day, nearly every day for at least 2 weeks.Two of the most common forms of depression are:Some forms of depression are slightly different, or they may develop under unique circumstances, such as:Other examples of depressive disorders include disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (diagnosed in children and adolescents) and premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Depression can also be one phase of bipolar disorder (formerly called manic-depression). But a person with bipolar disorder also experiences extreme high—euphoric or irritable —moods called “mania” or a less severe form called “hypomania.”You can learn more about these disorders on the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)’s website (www.nimh.nih.gov).Scientists at NIMH and across the country are studying the causes of depression. Research suggests that a combination of genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors play a role in depression.Depression can occur along with other serious illnesses, such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and Parkinson’s disease. Depression can make these conditions worse and vice versa. Sometimes medications taken for these illnesses may cause side effects that contribute to depression symptoms. For more information on ongoing research on depression, visit www.nimh.nih.gov.Sadness is only one small part of depression and some people with depression may not feel sadness at all. Different people have different symptoms. Some symptoms of depression include:No. Depression affects different people in different ways. For example:Women have depression more often than men. Biological, lifecycle, and hormonal factors that are unique to women may be linked to their higher depression rate. Women with depression typically have symptoms of sadness, worthlessness, and guilt.Men with depression are more likely to be very tired, irritable, and sometimes angry. They may lose interest in work or activities they once enjoyed, have sleep problems, and behave recklessly, including the misuse of drugs or alcohol. Many men do not recognize their depression and fail to seek help.Older adults with depression may have less obvious symptoms, or they may be less likely to admit to feelings of sadness or grief. They are also more likely to have medical conditions, such as heart disease, which may cause or contribute to depression.Younger children with depression may pretend to be sick, refuse to go to school, cling to a parent, or worry that a parent may die.Older children and teens with depression may get into trouble at school, sulk, and be irritable. Teens with depression may have symptoms of other disorders, such as anxiety, eating disorders, or substance abuse.The first step in getting the right treatment is to visit a health care provider or mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist. Your health care provider can do an exam, interview, and lab tests to rule out other health conditions that may have the same symptoms as depression. Once diagnosed, depression can be treated with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. If these treatments do not reduce symptoms, brain stimulation therapy may be another treatment option to explore.Medications called antidepressants can work well to treat depression. They can take 2 to 4 weeks to work. Antidepressants can have side effects, but many side effects may lessen over time. Talk to your health care provider about any side effects that you have. Do not stop taking your antidepressant without first talking to your health care provider.Please Note: Although antidepressants can be effective for many people, they may present serious risks to some, especially children, teens, and young adults. Antidepressants may cause some people, especially those who become agitated when they first start taking the medication and before it begins to work, to have suicidal thoughts or make suicide attempts. Anyone taking antidepressants should be monitored closely, especially when they first start taking them. For most people, though, the risks of untreated depression far outweigh those of antidepressant medications when they are used under a doctor’s careful supervision.Information about medications changes frequently. Visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website for the latest warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Psychotherapy helps by teaching new ways of thinking and behaving, and changing habits that may be contributing to depression. Therapy can help you understand and work through difficult relationships or situations that may be causing your depression or making it worse.Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and other brain stimulation therapies may be an option for people with severe depression who do not respond to antidepressant medications. ECT is the best studied brain stimulation therapy and has the longest history of use. Other stimulation therapies discussed here are newer, and in some cases still experimental methods. For more information on these treatment options, visit www.nimh.nih.gov/health. To find clinical trials, visit www.clinicaltrials.gov.As you continue treatment, you may start to feel better gradually. Remember that if you are taking an antidepressant, it may take 2 to 4 weeks to start working. Try to do things that you used to enjoy. Go easy on yourself. Other things that may help include:If you know someone who has depression, first help him or her see a health care provider or mental health professional. You can also:If you are unsure where to go for help, ask your health provider or check out the NIMH Help for Mental Illnesses webpage at www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp. Another Federal health agency, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), maintains an online Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator at https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov/. You can also check online for mental health professionals; contact your community health center, local mental health association, or insurance plan to find a mental health professional. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to use these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or e-mail nimhinfo@nih.gov.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service (www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/) has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. TR 16-3561 Revised 2016The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you feel sad, empty, and hopeless most of the day, nearly every day? Have you lost interest or pleasure in your hobbies or being with friends and family? Are you having trouble sleeping, eating, and functioning? If you have felt this way for at least 2 weeks, you may have depression, a serious but treatable mood disorder.Everyone feels sad or low sometimes, but these feelings usually pass with a little time. Depression—also called “clinical depression” or a “depressive disorder”—is a mood disorder that causes distressing symptoms that affect how you feel, think, and handle daily activities, such as sleeping, eating, or working. To be diagnosed with depression, symptoms must be present most of the day, nearly every day for at least 2 weeks.Two of the most common forms of depression are:Some forms of depression are slightly different, or they may develop under unique circumstances, such as:Other examples of depressive disorders include disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (diagnosed in children and adolescents) and premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Depression can also be one phase of bipolar disorder (formerly called manic-depression). But a person with bipolar disorder also experiences extreme high—euphoric or irritable —moods called “mania” or a less severe form called “hypomania.”You can learn more about these disorders on the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)’s website (www.nimh.nih.gov).Scientists at NIMH and across the country are studying the causes of depression. Research suggests that a combination of genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors play a role in depression.Depression can occur along with other serious illnesses, such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and Parkinson’s disease. Depression can make these conditions worse and vice versa. Sometimes medications taken for these illnesses may cause side effects that contribute to depression symptoms. For more information on ongoing research on depression, visit www.nimh.nih.gov.Sadness is only one small part of depression and some people with depression may not feel sadness at all. Different people have different symptoms. Some symptoms of depression include:No. Depression affects different people in different ways. For example:Women have depression more often than men. Biological, lifecycle, and hormonal factors that are unique to women may be linked to their higher depression rate. Women with depression typically have symptoms of sadness, worthlessness, and guilt.Men with depression are more likely to be very tired, irritable, and sometimes angry. They may lose interest in work or activities they once enjoyed, have sleep problems, and behave recklessly, including the misuse of drugs or alcohol. Many men do not recognize their depression and fail to seek help.Older adults with depression may have less obvious symptoms, or they may be less likely to admit to feelings of sadness or grief. They are also more likely to have medical conditions, such as heart disease, which may cause or contribute to depression.Younger children with depression may pretend to be sick, refuse to go to school, cling to a parent, or worry that a parent may die.Older children and teens with depression may get into trouble at school, sulk, and be irritable. Teens with depression may have symptoms of other disorders, such as anxiety, eating disorders, or substance abuse.The first step in getting the right treatment is to visit a health care provider or mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist. Your health care provider can do an exam, interview, and lab tests to rule out other health conditions that may have the same symptoms as depression. Once diagnosed, depression can be treated with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. If these treatments do not reduce symptoms, brain stimulation therapy may be another treatment option to explore.Medications called antidepressants can work well to treat depression. They can take 2 to 4 weeks to work. Antidepressants can have side effects, but many side effects may lessen over time. Talk to your health care provider about any side effects that you have. Do not stop taking your antidepressant without first talking to your health care provider.Please Note: Although antidepressants can be effective for many people, they may present serious risks to some, especially children, teens, and young adults. Antidepressants may cause some people, especially those who become agitated when they first start taking the medication and before it begins to work, to have suicidal thoughts or make suicide attempts. Anyone taking antidepressants should be monitored closely, especially when they first start taking them. For most people, though, the risks of untreated depression far outweigh those of antidepressant medications when they are used under a doctor’s careful supervision.Information about medications changes frequently. Visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website for the latest warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Psychotherapy helps by teaching new ways of thinking and behaving, and changing habits that may be contributing to depression. Therapy can help you understand and work through difficult relationships or situations that may be causing your depression or making it worse.Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and other brain stimulation therapies may be an option for people with severe depression who do not respond to antidepressant medications. ECT is the best studied brain stimulation therapy and has the longest history of use. Other stimulation therapies discussed here are newer, and in some cases still experimental methods. For more information on these treatment options, visit www.nimh.nih.gov/health. To find clinical trials, visit www.clinicaltrials.gov.As you continue treatment, you may start to feel better gradually. Remember that if you are taking an antidepressant, it may take 2 to 4 weeks to start working. Try to do things that you used to enjoy. Go easy on yourself. Other things that may help include:If you know someone who has depression, first help him or her see a health care provider or mental health professional. You can also:If you are unsure where to go for help, ask your health provider or check out the NIMH Help for Mental Illnesses webpage at www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp. Another Federal health agency, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), maintains an online Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator at https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov/. You can also check online for mental health professionals; contact your community health center, local mental health association, or insurance plan to find a mental health professional. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to use these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or e-mail nimhinfo@nih.gov.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service (www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/) has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. TR 16-3561 Revised 2016The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you feel sad, empty, and hopeless most of the day, nearly every day? Have you lost interest or pleasure in your hobbies or being with friends and family? Are you having trouble sleeping, eating, and functioning? If you have felt this way for at least 2 weeks, you may have depression, a serious but treatable mood disorder.Everyone feels sad or low sometimes, but these feelings usually pass with a little time. Depression—also called “clinical depression” or a “depressive disorder”—is a mood disorder that causes distressing symptoms that affect how you feel, think, and handle daily activities, such as sleeping, eating, or working. To be diagnosed with depression, symptoms must be present most of the day, nearly every day for at least 2 weeks.Two of the most common forms of depression are:Some forms of depression are slightly different, or they may develop under unique circumstances, such as:Other examples of depressive disorders include disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (diagnosed in children and adolescents) and premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Depression can also be one phase of bipolar disorder (formerly called manic-depression). But a person with bipolar disorder also experiences extreme high—euphoric or irritable —moods called “mania” or a less severe form called “hypomania.”You can learn more about these disorders on the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)’s website (www.nimh.nih.gov).Scientists at NIMH and across the country are studying the causes of depression. Research suggests that a combination of genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors play a role in depression.Depression can occur along with other serious illnesses, such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and Parkinson’s disease. Depression can make these conditions worse and vice versa. Sometimes medications taken for these illnesses may cause side effects that contribute to depression symptoms. For more information on ongoing research on depression, visit www.nimh.nih.gov.Sadness is only one small part of depression and some people with depression may not feel sadness at all. Different people have different symptoms. Some symptoms of depression include:No. Depression affects different people in different ways. For example:Women have depression more often than men. Biological, lifecycle, and hormonal factors that are unique to women may be linked to their higher depression rate. Women with depression typically have symptoms of sadness, worthlessness, and guilt.Men with depression are more likely to be very tired, irritable, and sometimes angry. They may lose interest in work or activities they once enjoyed, have sleep problems, and behave recklessly, including the misuse of drugs or alcohol. Many men do not recognize their depression and fail to seek help.Older adults with depression may have less obvious symptoms, or they may be less likely to admit to feelings of sadness or grief. They are also more likely to have medical conditions, such as heart disease, which may cause or contribute to depression.Younger children with depression may pretend to be sick, refuse to go to school, cling to a parent, or worry that a parent may die.Older children and teens with depression may get into trouble at school, sulk, and be irritable. Teens with depression may have symptoms of other disorders, such as anxiety, eating disorders, or substance abuse.The first step in getting the right treatment is to visit a health care provider or mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist. Your health care provider can do an exam, interview, and lab tests to rule out other health conditions that may have the same symptoms as depression. Once diagnosed, depression can be treated with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. If these treatments do not reduce symptoms, brain stimulation therapy may be another treatment option to explore.Medications called antidepressants can work well to treat depression. They can take 2 to 4 weeks to work. Antidepressants can have side effects, but many side effects may lessen over time. Talk to your health care provider about any side effects that you have. Do not stop taking your antidepressant without first talking to your health care provider.Please Note: Although antidepressants can be effective for many people, they may present serious risks to some, especially children, teens, and young adults. Antidepressants may cause some people, especially those who become agitated when they first start taking the medication and before it begins to work, to have suicidal thoughts or make suicide attempts. Anyone taking antidepressants should be monitored closely, especially when they first start taking them. For most people, though, the risks of untreated depression far outweigh those of antidepressant medications when they are used under a doctor’s careful supervision.Information about medications changes frequently. Visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website for the latest warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Psychotherapy helps by teaching new ways of thinking and behaving, and changing habits that may be contributing to depression. Therapy can help you understand and work through difficult relationships or situations that may be causing your depression or making it worse.Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and other brain stimulation therapies may be an option for people with severe depression who do not respond to antidepressant medications. ECT is the best studied brain stimulation therapy and has the longest history of use. Other stimulation therapies discussed here are newer, and in some cases still experimental methods. For more information on these treatment options, visit www.nimh.nih.gov/health. To find clinical trials, visit www.clinicaltrials.gov.As you continue treatment, you may start to feel better gradually. Remember that if you are taking an antidepressant, it may take 2 to 4 weeks to start working. Try to do things that you used to enjoy. Go easy on yourself. Other things that may help include:If you know someone who has depression, first help him or her see a health care provider or mental health professional. You can also:If you are unsure where to go for help, ask your health provider or check out the NIMH Help for Mental Illnesses webpage at www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp. Another Federal health agency, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), maintains an online Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator at https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov/. You can also check online for mental health professionals; contact your community health center, local mental health association, or insurance plan to find a mental health professional. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to use these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or e-mail nimhinfo@nih.gov.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service (www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/) has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. TR 16-3561 Revised 2016The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you feel sad, empty, and hopeless most of the day, nearly every day? Have you lost interest or pleasure in your hobbies or being with friends and family? Are you having trouble sleeping, eating, and functioning? If you have felt this way for at least 2 weeks, you may have depression, a serious but treatable mood disorder.Everyone feels sad or low sometimes, but these feelings usually pass with a little time. Depression—also called “clinical depression” or a “depressive disorder”—is a mood disorder that causes distressing symptoms that affect how you feel, think, and handle daily activities, such as sleeping, eating, or working. To be diagnosed with depression, symptoms must be present most of the day, nearly every day for at least 2 weeks.Two of the most common forms of depression are:Some forms of depression are slightly different, or they may develop under unique circumstances, such as:Other examples of depressive disorders include disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (diagnosed in children and adolescents) and premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Depression can also be one phase of bipolar disorder (formerly called manic-depression). But a person with bipolar disorder also experiences extreme high—euphoric or irritable —moods called “mania” or a less severe form called “hypomania.”You can learn more about these disorders on the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)’s website (www.nimh.nih.gov).Scientists at NIMH and across the country are studying the causes of depression. Research suggests that a combination of genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors play a role in depression.Depression can occur along with other serious illnesses, such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and Parkinson’s disease. Depression can make these conditions worse and vice versa. Sometimes medications taken for these illnesses may cause side effects that contribute to depression symptoms. For more information on ongoing research on depression, visit www.nimh.nih.gov.Sadness is only one small part of depression and some people with depression may not feel sadness at all. Different people have different symptoms. Some symptoms of depression include:No. Depression affects different people in different ways. For example:Women have depression more often than men. Biological, lifecycle, and hormonal factors that are unique to women may be linked to their higher depression rate. Women with depression typically have symptoms of sadness, worthlessness, and guilt.Men with depression are more likely to be very tired, irritable, and sometimes angry. They may lose interest in work or activities they once enjoyed, have sleep problems, and behave recklessly, including the misuse of drugs or alcohol. Many men do not recognize their depression and fail to seek help.Older adults with depression may have less obvious symptoms, or they may be less likely to admit to feelings of sadness or grief. They are also more likely to have medical conditions, such as heart disease, which may cause or contribute to depression.Younger children with depression may pretend to be sick, refuse to go to school, cling to a parent, or worry that a parent may die.Older children and teens with depression may get into trouble at school, sulk, and be irritable. Teens with depression may have symptoms of other disorders, such as anxiety, eating disorders, or substance abuse.The first step in getting the right treatment is to visit a health care provider or mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist. Your health care provider can do an exam, interview, and lab tests to rule out other health conditions that may have the same symptoms as depression. Once diagnosed, depression can be treated with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. If these treatments do not reduce symptoms, brain stimulation therapy may be another treatment option to explore.Medications called antidepressants can work well to treat depression. They can take 2 to 4 weeks to work. Antidepressants can have side effects, but many side effects may lessen over time. Talk to your health care provider about any side effects that you have. Do not stop taking your antidepressant without first talking to your health care provider.Please Note: Although antidepressants can be effective for many people, they may present serious risks to some, especially children, teens, and young adults. Antidepressants may cause some people, especially those who become agitated when they first start taking the medication and before it begins to work, to have suicidal thoughts or make suicide attempts. Anyone taking antidepressants should be monitored closely, especially when they first start taking them. For most people, though, the risks of untreated depression far outweigh those of antidepressant medications when they are used under a doctor’s careful supervision.Information about medications changes frequently. Visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website for the latest warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Psychotherapy helps by teaching new ways of thinking and behaving, and changing habits that may be contributing to depression. Therapy can help you understand and work through difficult relationships or situations that may be causing your depression or making it worse.Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and other brain stimulation therapies may be an option for people with severe depression who do not respond to antidepressant medications. ECT is the best studied brain stimulation therapy and has the longest history of use. Other stimulation therapies discussed here are newer, and in some cases still experimental methods. For more information on these treatment options, visit www.nimh.nih.gov/health. To find clinical trials, visit www.clinicaltrials.gov.As you continue treatment, you may start to feel better gradually. Remember that if you are taking an antidepressant, it may take 2 to 4 weeks to start working. Try to do things that you used to enjoy. Go easy on yourself. Other things that may help include:If you know someone who has depression, first help him or her see a health care provider or mental health professional. You can also:If you are unsure where to go for help, ask your health provider or check out the NIMH Help for Mental Illnesses webpage at www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp. Another Federal health agency, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), maintains an online Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator at https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov/. You can also check online for mental health professionals; contact your community health center, local mental health association, or insurance plan to find a mental health professional. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to use these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or e-mail nimhinfo@nih.gov.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service (www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/) has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. TR 16-3561 Revised 2016The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you feel sad, empty, and hopeless most of the day, nearly every day? Have you lost interest or pleasure in your hobbies or being with friends and family? Are you having trouble sleeping, eating, and functioning? If you have felt this way for at least 2 weeks, you may have depression, a serious but treatable mood disorder.Everyone feels sad or low sometimes, but these feelings usually pass with a little time. Depression—also called “clinical depression” or a “depressive disorder”—is a mood disorder that causes distressing symptoms that affect how you feel, think, and handle daily activities, such as sleeping, eating, or working. To be diagnosed with depression, symptoms must be present most of the day, nearly every day for at least 2 weeks.Two of the most common forms of depression are:Some forms of depression are slightly different, or they may develop under unique circumstances, such as:Other examples of depressive disorders include disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (diagnosed in children and adolescents) and premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Depression can also be one phase of bipolar disorder (formerly called manic-depression). But a person with bipolar disorder also experiences extreme high—euphoric or irritable —moods called “mania” or a less severe form called “hypomania.”You can learn more about these disorders on the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)’s website (www.nimh.nih.gov).Scientists at NIMH and across the country are studying the causes of depression. Research suggests that a combination of genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors play a role in depression.Depression can occur along with other serious illnesses, such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and Parkinson’s disease. Depression can make these conditions worse and vice versa. Sometimes medications taken for these illnesses may cause side effects that contribute to depression symptoms. For more information on ongoing research on depression, visit www.nimh.nih.gov.Sadness is only one small part of depression and some people with depression may not feel sadness at all. Different people have different symptoms. Some symptoms of depression include:No. Depression affects different people in different ways. For example:Women have depression more often than men. Biological, lifecycle, and hormonal factors that are unique to women may be linked to their higher depression rate. Women with depression typically have symptoms of sadness, worthlessness, and guilt.Men with depression are more likely to be very tired, irritable, and sometimes angry. They may lose interest in work or activities they once enjoyed, have sleep problems, and behave recklessly, including the misuse of drugs or alcohol. Many men do not recognize their depression and fail to seek help.Older adults with depression may have less obvious symptoms, or they may be less likely to admit to feelings of sadness or grief. They are also more likely to have medical conditions, such as heart disease, which may cause or contribute to depression.Younger children with depression may pretend to be sick, refuse to go to school, cling to a parent, or worry that a parent may die.Older children and teens with depression may get into trouble at school, sulk, and be irritable. Teens with depression may have symptoms of other disorders, such as anxiety, eating disorders, or substance abuse.The first step in getting the right treatment is to visit a health care provider or mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist. Your health care provider can do an exam, interview, and lab tests to rule out other health conditions that may have the same symptoms as depression. Once diagnosed, depression can be treated with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. If these treatments do not reduce symptoms, brain stimulation therapy may be another treatment option to explore.Medications called antidepressants can work well to treat depression. They can take 2 to 4 weeks to work. Antidepressants can have side effects, but many side effects may lessen over time. Talk to your health care provider about any side effects that you have. Do not stop taking your antidepressant without first talking to your health care provider.Please Note: Although antidepressants can be effective for many people, they may present serious risks to some, especially children, teens, and young adults. Antidepressants may cause some people, especially those who become agitated when they first start taking the medication and before it begins to work, to have suicidal thoughts or make suicide attempts. Anyone taking antidepressants should be monitored closely, especially when they first start taking them. For most people, though, the risks of untreated depression far outweigh those of antidepressant medications when they are used under a doctor’s careful supervision.Information about medications changes frequently. Visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website for the latest warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Psychotherapy helps by teaching new ways of thinking and behaving, and changing habits that may be contributing to depression. Therapy can help you understand and work through difficult relationships or situations that may be causing your depression or making it worse.Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and other brain stimulation therapies may be an option for people with severe depression who do not respond to antidepressant medications. ECT is the best studied brain stimulation therapy and has the longest history of use. Other stimulation therapies discussed here are newer, and in some cases still experimental methods. For more information on these treatment options, visit www.nimh.nih.gov/health. To find clinical trials, visit www.clinicaltrials.gov.As you continue treatment, you may start to feel better gradually. Remember that if you are taking an antidepressant, it may take 2 to 4 weeks to start working. Try to do things that you used to enjoy. Go easy on yourself. Other things that may help include:If you know someone who has depression, first help him or her see a health care provider or mental health professional. You can also:If you are unsure where to go for help, ask your health provider or check out the NIMH Help for Mental Illnesses webpage at www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp. Another Federal health agency, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), maintains an online Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator at https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov/. You can also check online for mental health professionals; contact your community health center, local mental health association, or insurance plan to find a mental health professional. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to use these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or e-mail nimhinfo@nih.gov.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service (www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/) has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. TR 16-3561 Revised 2016The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuEste folleto trata sobre el trastorno de déficit de atención con hiperactividad (TDAH) en los adultos. Explica qué es, cómo afecta a los adultos, los síntomas, las causas, el diagnóstico y los tratamientos.In EnglishLeer másEl folleto ofrece información básica sobre el trastorno de déficit de atención con hiperactividad en los niños y los adultos, e incluye una explicación de lo que es, los signos y los síntomas, las causas, los tratamientos y dónde encontrar ayuda.In EnglishLeer másThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuEsta hoja informativa define lo que es el estrés y explica cinco datos importantes sobre el estrés incluyendo que el estrés afecta a todos, que no todo estrés es malo, cómo afecta el estrés a la salud, cómo manejar el estrés y dónde obtener ayuda.In EnglishLeer másEste folleto describe lo que es el trastorno de la ansiedad generalizada, incluyendo las señalas y los síntomas, cómo se diagnostica, sus causas y opciones de tratamiento.In EnglishLeer másEste folleto describe lo que es el trastorno de ansiedad social, incluyendo las señales y síntomas, causas, opciones de tratamiento y cómo encontrar ayuda para este trastorno.In EnglishLeer másEste folleto describe lo que es el trastorno de pánico, señales y síntomas, causas, opciones de tratamiento y dónde encontrar ayuda.In EnglishLeer másEste folleto trata sobre el trastorno obsesivo-compulsivo y describe qué es y sus síntomas, causas y tratamiento, incluyendo la terapia cognitivo-conductual y los medicamentos.In EnglishLeer másThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuEste folleto define lo que es el trastorno bipolar y a quién le puede dar, su diagnóstico y tratamiento en los niños y los adolescentes, cómo ayudar a un niño o adolescente con este trastorno y cómo afecta a los padres y demás familiares.In EnglishLeer másUn panfleto, el cuál es fácil de leer, que explica que es el trastorno bipolar, cuando comienza, y cómo conseguir ayudaIn EnglishLeer másThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuUn panfleto que explica qué es la depresión y cómo obtener ayuda.In EnglishLeer másLa depresión posparto es un trastorno del estado de ánimo que puede afectar a las mujeres después de dar a luz. Las madres que padecen depresión posparto tienen sentimientos de extrema tristeza, ansiedad y cansancio que les dificultan realizar las actividades diarias del cuidado de sí mismas y de otras personas.In EnglishLeer másUn folleto sobre la depresión que explica que la depresión es una enfermedad real y describe las señales y los síntomas, los tipos de depresión, las diferentes maneras cómo la depresión puede afectar a las personas, los tratamientos para la depresión, qué hacer si uno cree que un ser querido está deprimido, además de contener información sobre recursos adicionales.In EnglishLeer másEste folleto, que está dirigido a los adolescentes que puedan tener depresión, les ayuda a entender lo que es la depresión y cómo difiere de la tristeza normal. Describe los síntomas, las causas, los tratamientos, cómo la depresión puede afectar las relaciones con los demás, cosas que pueden hacer para sentirse mejor y dónde obtener ayuda.In EnglishLeer másLa depresión es una enfermedad grave que necesita tratamiento.In EnglishLeer másEste folleto sobre la depresión en los estudiantes universitarios describe lo que es la depresión, los tipos de depresión, las señales y los síntomas, trastornos co-existentes con la depresión, las alternativas de tratamiento, la psicoterapia o terapia de diálogo, los medicamentos, pensamientos suicidas, y dónde obtener ayuda.In EnglishLeer másEsta hoja de datos habla sobre las enfermedades crónicas y el riesgo de desarrollar depresión. Incluye los síntomas, tratamientos, recuperación y los efectos sobre la salud de la depresión.In EnglishLeer másEste folleto sobre la depresión en las personas mayores explica que la depresión no es parte normal del envejecimiento.In EnglishLeer másHombres y mujeres pueden experimentar depresión muy diferente. Este folleto describe los signos y síntomas comunes y las opciones de tratamiento para la depresión en los hombres.In EnglishLeer másThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuEste folleto describe lo que es el trastorno de ansiedad social, incluyendo las señales y síntomas, causas, opciones de tratamiento y cómo encontrar ayuda para este trastorno.In EnglishLeer másThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.Menu¿Algunos días se siente muy feliz y con mucha energía y otros muy triste y deprimido? Estos estados de ánimo, ¿le duran una semana o más? ¿Le es difícil dormir, concentrarse o ir a trabajar debido a estos cambios en el estado de ánimo?Algunas personas con estos síntomas tienen el trastorno bipolar, una enfermedad mental grave. Este folleto le dará más información sobre este trastorno.El trastorno bipolar es una enfermedad grave del cerebro. También se conoce como enfermedad maníaco-depresiva o depresión maníaca. Las personas con trastorno bipolar tienen cambios inusuales en el estado de ánimo. A veces se sienten muy felices y “animados” y son mucho más enérgicos y activos de lo habitual. Esto se llama un episodio maníaco. Otras veces, las personas con trastorno bipolar se sienten muy tristes y “deprimidos”, tienen poca energía y son mucho menos activos de lo normal. Esto se conoce como depresión o un episodio depresivo.Los “altibajos” del trastorno bipolar no son iguales que los altibajos normales que todos tenemos. Los cambios en el estado de ánimo son más extremos y vienen acompañados de cambios en el sueño, el nivel de energía y la capacidad de pensar con claridad. Los síntomas bipolares son tan fuertes que pueden perjudicar las relaciones y dificultar asistir a la escuela o universidad o mantener un trabajo. Esta enfermedad también puede ser peligrosa. Algunas personas con trastorno bipolar intentan hacerse daño o suicidarse.Las personas con trastorno bipolar pueden recibir tratamiento. Con ayuda, pueden mejorar y llevar una vida exitosa.El trastorno bipolar se puede presentar en cualquier persona. Con frecuencia, los síntomas comienzan a presentarse en la adolescencia tardía o la adultez temprana, pero pueden presentarse en los niños y en los adultos mayores también. Por lo general, la enfermedad dura toda la vida.Los médicos no saben cuál es la causa del trastorno bipolar, pero hay varias cosas que pueden contribuir a la enfermedad. Los genes familiares pueden ser un factor, ya que el trastorno bipolar se puede dar en familias. Sin embargo, es importante saber que sólo porque alguien en su familia tiene el trastorno bipolar, no significa que otros miembros de la familia también lo tendrán.Otro factor que puede conducir al trastorno bipolar es la estructura del cerebro o la función cerebral de la persona con el trastorno. Los científicos están estudiando la enfermedad y así descubriendo más sobre ella. Esta investigación puede ayudar a los médicos a tratar mejor a los pacientes. Además, puede ayudar a los médicos a predecir si el trastorno bipolar se puede presentar en una persona. Es posible que algún día los médicos puedan llegar a prevenir la enfermedad en ciertas personas.Los “episodios anímicos” del trastorno bipolar incluyen cambios inusuales en el estado de ánimo conjuntamente con cambios inusuales en los hábitos de dormir, niveles de actividad, pensamientos o comportamiento. Las personas con trastorno bipolar pueden tener episodios maníacos, episodios depresivos o episodios "mixtos". Un episodio mixto incluye síntomas maníacos y síntomas depresivos. Los síntomas de un episodio anímico duran una o dos semanas y, a veces, hasta más. Cuando una persona está pasando por uno de estos episodios, los síntomas se le presentan todos los días y duran la mayor parte del día.Los episodios anímicos son intensos. Los sentimientos son fuertes y suceden junto con cambios extremos en el comportamiento y en los niveles de energía.Las personas que están teniendo un episodio maníaco pueden:Las personas que están teniendo un episodio depresivo pueden:Sí. A veces las personas que padecen de episodios anímicos muy intensos pueden tener síntomas psicóticos. La psicosis afecta los pensamientos y las emociones, así como la capacidad de una persona para distinguir lo que es real de lo que no lo es. Las personas con manía y síntomas psicóticos pueden creer que son ricos y famosos o que tienen poderes especiales. Las personas con depresión y síntomas psicóticos pueden creer que han cometido un crimen, que han perdido todo su dinero o que sus vidas están arruinadas por alguna otra razón.A veces los episodios anímicos van acompañados de problemas de comportamiento. La persona puede beber demasiado o consumir drogas. Algunas personas corren muchos riesgos como, por ejemplo, gastan demasiado dinero o tienen sexo de manera imprudente. Estos problemas pueden dañar su vida y perjudicar sus relaciones. Algunas personas que tienen el trastorno bipolar tienen problemas manteniendo su empleo o desempeñándose bien en sus estudios.No. Algunas personas tienen el trastorno bipolar durante años antes de que se diagnostique la enfermedad. Esto ocurre porque los síntomas bipolares pueden parecerse a otros problemas diferentes. Los familiares y amigos pueden notar los síntomas, pero no darse cuenta que son parte de un problema mayor. El médico puede creer que la persona tiene una enfermedad distinta como, por ejemplo, esquizofrenia o depresión.Además, las personas que tienen el trastorno bipolar a menudo también tienen otros problemas de salud. Esto puede dificultar el diagnóstico de trastorno bipolar. Algunos ejemplos de estos otros problemas incluyen el abuso de sustancias, los trastornos de ansiedad, la enfermedad de la tiroides, las enfermedades cardíacas y la obesidad.Por ahora, no hay cura para el trastorno bipolar, pero el tratamiento puede ayudar a controlar los síntomas. La mayoría de las personas pueden obtener ayuda para controlar los cambios en el estado de ánimo y los problemas de comportamiento. El tratamiento funciona mejor cuando es constante y no se lo interrumpe. Las opciones de tratamiento incluyen:Algunas personas toman suplementos naturales o a base de hierbas, como la hierba de San Juan (St. John’s Wort en inglés) o los ácidos grasos omega-3. Consúltele a su médico antes de tomar cualquier suplemento. Los científicos no están seguros cómo estos productos afectan a las personas que tienen el trastorno bipolar. Es posible que algunas personas también necesiten medicamentos para dormir durante el tratamiento.Esta es su historia.Hace cuatro meses, Santiago descubrió que tenía el trastorno bipolar. Sabía que era una enfermedad grave, pero se sintió aliviado cuando supo el diagnóstico. Sintió alivio porque por años tuvo síntomas, pero nadie sabía qué tenía. Ahora está recibiendo tratamiento y se siente mejor.A menudo, Santiago se sentía muy triste. De niño, faltaba a la escuela o se quedaba en la cama cuando estaba decaído. En otras ocasiones, se sentía muy feliz. Hablaba rápidamente y sintió como que podía hacer cualquier cosa. Santiago vivió así durante mucho tiempo, pero las cosas cambiaron el año pasado. Su trabajo se puso muy estresante. Se sentía como si estuviera teniendo más "altibajos" que antes. Su esposa y sus amigos querían saber qué le estaba pasando. Les dijo que lo dejaran solo y que todo estaba bien.Unas pocas semanas más tarde, Santiago no pudo levantarse de la cama. Se sentía muy mal y el malestar le duró varios días. Entonces, su esposa lo llevó al médico de la familia, quien lo envió a ver a un psiquiatra. Santiago habló con el psiquiatra sobre cómo se sentía. Pronto Santiago pudo darse cuenta que sus altibajos eran graves. Le diagnosticaron trastorno bipolar y comenzó el tratamiento.Ahora, Santiago toma medicamentos y va a sesiones de psicoterapia. El tratamiento fue difícil al principio, y la recuperación tomó algún tiempo, pero ahora está de vuelta en el trabajo. Sus cambios en el estado de ánimo son más fáciles de manejar y nuevamente se está divirtiendo con su esposa y amigos.Si no sabe dónde conseguir ayuda, llame a su médico de familia. También puede buscar en el listado de profesionales de la salud mental en la guía telefónica. Los médicos en los hospitales pueden ayudar en una emergencia. Por último, la Administración de Servicios de Salud Mental y Abuso de Sustancias (SAMHSA, por sus siglas en inglés) tiene una herramienta en el Internet que le puede ayudar a encontrar servicios de salud mental en su área. Puede encontrarla aquí: https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov.Usted se puede ayudar obteniendo tratamiento y no interrumpiéndolo. La recuperación no es fácil y lleva tiempo, pero el tratamiento es la mejor manera de empezar a sentirse bien. Aquí le damos algunos consejos:Lo primero que puede hacer es ayudar a su amigo o familiar a consultar a un médico y obtener un diagnóstico y tratamiento adecuado. Es posible que usted tenga que hacer la cita y acompañarle al médico. A continuación, le indicamos algunas cosas que puede hacer para ayudar:Si usted conoce a alguien que puede estar pensando en hacerse daño o si usted está pensando en hacerse daño, obtenga ayuda de inmediato. Estas son algunas cosas que puede hacer:Cuando un amigo o familiar tiene trastorno bipolar, también le afecta a usted. Cuidar de alguien que tiene el trastorno bipolar puede ser estresante. Tiene que enfrentar los cambios en el estado de ánimo y posiblemente otros problemas, como el alcoholismo. A veces el estrés puede afectar sus relaciones con otras personas. Los cuidadores pueden faltar al trabajo o perder su tiempo libre.Si cuida de alguien que tiene el trastorno bipolar, cuídese usted también. Encuentre con quien hablar sobre lo que siente. Consúltele a su médico sobre grupos de apoyo para las personas que, como usted, cuidan de otros. Si mantiene su nivel de estrés bajo, podrá desempeñarse mejor. Esto podría ayudar a que su ser querido siga su tratamiento.Instituto Nacional de la Salud Mental Oficina de Política Científica, Planificación y Comunicaciones División de Redacción Científica, Prensa y Difusión 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Teléfono: 301–443–4513 o 1–866–615–6464 (1–866–615–NIMH)*  Teléfono para personas con problemas auditivos: 301–443–8431 o 1–866–415–8051* Fax: 301–443–4279 Correo electrónico: nimhinfo@nih.gov Sitios web: https://www.nimh.nih.gov (inglés) o  http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/espanol/index.shtml (español)*Las llamadas a los números telefónicos que empiezan con 1–866 son gratuitas para quienes viven en los Estados UnidosDEPARTAMENTO DE SALUD Y SERVICIOS HUMANOS     DE LOS ESTADOS UNIDOS Institutos Nacionales de la Salud Publicación de NIH Núm. STR 15-3679 Traducida en julio del 2009 Modificada en noviembre del 2016The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuEl trastorno por estrés postraumático (también conocido como TEPT) es un trastorno que algunas personas presentan después de haber vivido o presenciado un acontecimiento impactante, terrorífico o peligroso.Es natural sentir temor durante una situación traumática o después de ésta. Este temor provoca muchos cambios en el cuerpo en fracciones de segundo para responder a un peligro y para ayudar a evitar un peligro en el futuro. Esta respuesta de "lucha o huida" es una reacción típica que sirve para proteger a la persona de cualquier peligro. Casi todo el mundo tendrá una serie de reacciones después de una experiencia traumática. Sin embargo, la mayoría de las personas se recuperará de los síntomas de forma natural. Es posible que a las personas que continúen teniendo problemas se les diagnostique con trastorno por estrés postraumático. Las personas con este trastorno pueden sentirse estresadas o asustadas, incluso cuando ya no están en peligro.A cualquier persona le puede dar el trastorno por estrés postraumático a cualquier edad. Esto incluye a los veteranos de guerra, los sobrevivientes de agresiones físicas y sexuales, maltratos, accidentes de tráfico, catástrofes, atentados terroristas, u otros acontecimientos graves. No todas las personas con trastorno por estrés postraumático han pasado por una situación peligrosa. Algunos acontecimientos, como la muerte repentina o inesperada de un ser querido, también pueden causar el trastorno por estrés postraumático.Según el Centro Nacional para el Trastorno por Estrés Postraumático, alrededor de 7 u 8 de cada 100 personas presentarán este trastorno en algún momento de sus vidas. Las mujeres son más propensas que los hombres a presentarlo. Algunas experiencias traumáticas pueden aumentar el riesgo y algunos factores biológicos, como los genes, pueden hacer que algunas personas sean más propensas que otras a presentar este trastorno.Los síntomas suelen comenzar en los tres primeros meses después del incidente traumático, pero a veces empiezan más tarde. Para que se considere que se trata del trastorno por estrés postraumático, los síntomas deben durar más de un mes y ser lo suficientemente graves como para interferir con las relaciones o el trabajo. El curso de la enfermedad varía de una persona a otra. Algunas personas se recuperan en seis meses, mientras que otras tienen síntomas que duran mucho más tiempo. En algunas personas, el problema se vuelve crónico (persistente).Un médico con experiencia en ayudar a las personas con enfermedades mentales, como un psiquiatra o un psicólogo, puede diagnosticar el trastorno por estrés postraumático.Para recibir un diagnóstico de trastorno por estrés postraumático, un adulto debe tener todos los siguientes síntomas durante al menos un mes:Síntomas de reviviscenciaLos síntomas de reviviscencia pueden causar problemas en la rutina diaria de quien los presenta. Estos síntomas se pueden generar de los pensamientos y los sentimientos de la propia persona. Las palabras, los objetos o las situaciones que hacen recordar el episodio también pueden desencadenar síntomas de reviviscencia.Síntomas de evasiónAquellas cosas o situaciones que hacen recordar la experiencia traumática pueden desencadenar síntomas de evasión. Estos síntomas pueden hacer que la persona cambie su rutina personal. Por ejemplo, después de un accidente grave de automóvil, alguien que generalmente conduce puede evitar conducir o montarse en un automóvil.Síntomas de hipervigilancia y reactividadLos síntomas de hipervigilancia suelen ser constantes, en lugar de ser ocasionados por algo que trae recuerdos de la experiencia traumática. Estos síntomas pueden hacer que la persona se sienta estresada y enojada. También pueden dificultar las tareas diarias, como dormir, comer o concentrarse.Síntomas cognitivos y del estado de ánimoLos síntomas cognitivos y del estado de ánimo pueden comenzar o empeorar después de la experiencia traumática. Estos síntomas pueden hacer que la persona se sienta aislada o distanciada de sus amigos o familiares.Después de un acontecimiento peligroso, es natural tener algunos de los síntomas que se mencionaron anteriormente. A veces estos síntomas pueden ser muy graves, pero desaparecen después de unas semanas. Esto se conoce como trastorno por estrés agudo. Si los síntomas duran más de un mes, afectan gravemente la capacidad de una persona para funcionar y no se deben al consumo de sustancias, alguna enfermedad física, o ninguna otra cosa que no sea la situación traumática en sí, es posible que la persona tenga el trastorno por estrés postraumático. Algunas personas con este trastorno no muestran ningún síntoma por semanas o meses. A menudo, el trastorno por estrés postraumático viene acompañado de depresión, drogadicción, y uno o más trastornos de ansiedad.Los niños y los adolescentes pueden tener reacciones extremas a una experiencia traumática, pero es posible que sus síntomas no sean iguales a los de los adultos. En los niños muy pequeños (menores de 6 años), estos síntomas pueden incluir:Los niños más grandes y los adolescentes suelen mostrar síntomas más parecidos a los observados en los adultos. También pueden presentar conductas disruptivas, irrespetuosas o destructivas. Los niños más grandes y los adolescentes pueden sentirse culpables por no haber evitado lesiones o muertes. También pueden tener pensamientos de venganza. Para obtener más información, consulte la serie de publicaciones del NIMH, "Cómo ayudar a los niños y adolescentes a superar la violencia y otras experiencias traumáticas", que está disponible en el sitio web del NIMH: http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/espanol/spanish-listing.shtml.Es importante recordar que no todo el que pasa por una situación peligrosa tendrá el trastorno por estrés postraumático. De hecho, muchos se recuperarán rápidamente sin necesidad de una intervención.Hay muchos factores que desempeñan una función en si una persona tendrá el trastorno por estrés postraumático. Algunos de estos son factores de riesgo que hacen que una persona sea más propensa a presentar este trastorno. Otros factores, llamados factores de resiliencia, pueden ayudar a reducir el riesgo de presentar el trastorno. Algunos de estos factores de riesgo y de resiliencia están presentes antes del acontecimiento traumático, y otros cobran importancia durante la experiencia traumática o después de ésta.Los factores de riesgo del trastorno por estrés postraumático incluyen:Los factores de resiliencia que pueden reducir el riesgo de trastorno por estrés postraumático incluyen:Los investigadores están estudiando la importancia de los diversos factores de riesgo y de resiliencia, entre ellos, los aspectos genéticos y neurobiológicos. Con más investigaciones, algún día puede ser posible pronosticar quién es propenso a presentar el trastorno por estrés postraumático y evitarlo.Es importante que un profesional de la salud mental experto en el trastorno por estrés postraumático trate a una persona con este trastorno. Los principales tratamientos son la psicoterapia (terapia de "diálogo"), los medicamentos o una combinación de ambos. Cada persona es diferente y el trastorno por estrés postraumático afecta a las personas de diferentes maneras, por lo que es posible que un tratamiento que funciona para una persona no funcione para otra. Las personas con trastorno por estrés postraumático deben trabajar con un profesional de la salud mental para encontrar la mejor manera de tratar sus síntomas.Si alguien con trastorno por estrés postraumático está pasando por alguna situación traumática continua, como, por ejemplo, una relación abusiva, es necesario abordar ambos problemas. Otros problemas que se pueden estar teniendo al mismo tiempo incluyen trastornos de pánico, depresión, drogadicción y pensamientos suicidas. La investigación muestra que el apoyo de la familia y los amigos pueden ser una parte importante de la recuperación.La psicoterapia es la terapia de "diálogo". Hay muchos tipos de psicoterapia, pero todos implican hablar con un profesional de la salud mental para tratar una enfermedad mental. La psicoterapia puede darse individualmente o en grupo y, por lo general, tiene una duración de 6 a 12 semanas, pero puede tomar más tiempo.Hay muchos tipos de psicoterapia que pueden ayudar a las personas con trastorno por estrés postraumático. Algunos tipos se dirigen a los síntomas del trastorno, mientras que otros se enfocan en los problemas sociales, familiares o laborales. El médico o terapeuta puede combinar diferentes tratamientos en función de las necesidades de cada persona.Los tipos de psicoterapia eficaces tienden a enfatizar algunos componentes clave, entre ellos, conocer los síntomas, aprender habilidades para ayudar a identificar los factores desencadenantes de los síntomas y habilidades para controlarlos. Hay un tipo de psicoterapia que se llama terapia cognitivo-conductual e incluye lo siguiente:Terapia de exposición. Esta terapia ayuda a las personas a enfrentar y controlar su temor. Poco a poco se las expone a la situación traumática que sufrieron, pero de una manera segura. Se utilizan imágenes mentales, escritura o visitas al lugar donde ocurrió el hecho. El terapeuta utiliza estas técnicas para ayudar a las personas con trastorno por estrés postraumático a enfrentar sus sentimientos.Reestructuración cognitiva. Esta terapia ayuda a las personas a darle sentido a los malos recuerdos. A veces las personas recuerdan el acontecimiento de manera diferente de cómo sucedió. Pueden sentir culpa o vergüenza por algo que no es su culpa. El terapeuta ayuda a las personas con trastorno por estrés postraumático a mirar lo que ocurrió de una manera realista.Por medio de otros tipos de psicoterapia, se les enseña a las personas formas útiles de reaccionar ante acontecimientos aterradores que desencadenan los síntomas del trastorno por estrés postraumático. Sobre la base de este objetivo general, los diferentes tipos de terapia pueden:Los medicamentos más estudiados para el tratamiento del trastorno por estrés postraumático incluyen los antidepresivos, que pueden ayudar a controlar los síntomas como la tristeza, la preocupación, la ira y la sensación de vacío interno. Los antidepresivos y otros medicamentos se pueden recetar junto con la psicoterapia. Otros medicamentos pueden ser útiles para síntomas específicos de este trastorno. Por ejemplo, aunque actualmente no está aprobada por la Administración de Alimentos y Medicamentos (FDA, por sus siglas en inglés), la investigación ha demostrado que la prazosina puede ser útil con los problemas del sueño, en particular, las pesadillas, frecuentes en las personas con trastorno por estrés postraumático.Los médicos y los pacientes pueden trabajar juntos para encontrar el mejor medicamento o combinación de medicamentos, así como la dosis correcta. Consulte el sitio web de la FDA (http://www.fda.gov/) para la información más reciente sobre las guías de medicamentos para el paciente, advertencias o medicamentos recientemente aprobados.Si conoce a alguien que pueda tener el trastorno por estrés postraumático, lo primero y lo más importante que puede hacer es ayudarle a que reciba el diagnóstico correcto y el tratamiento adecuado. Es posible que tenga que ayudarle a pedir la cita y después acompañarle a la consulta médica. Anime a la persona a que permanezca en tratamiento o a que obtenga un tratamiento diferente si los síntomas no mejoran después de 6 a 8 semanas.Para ayudar a un amigo o un familiar, usted puede:Nunca ignore comentarios acerca de la muerte o el deseo de morir. Comuníquese con el terapeuta o el médico de su amigo o familiar para solicitar ayuda, o llame a la Red Nacional de Prevención del Suicidio las 24 horas al 1–888–628–9454; teléfono para personas con problemas auditivos: 1–800–799–4889 (1–800–799–4TTY); o al 911 en caso de emergencia.Hay otros tipos de tratamiento que también pueden ayudar. Las personas con trastorno por estrés postraumático deben hablar sobre todas las opciones de tratamiento con su profesional de la salud mental. El tratamiento debe dotar a las personas con habilidades para manejar sus síntomas y ayudarles a participar en las actividades que disfrutaban antes de tener el trastorno por estrés postraumático.Puede ser muy difícil dar el primer paso para ayudarse a sí mismo. Es importante darse cuenta de que puede mejorar con el tratamiento, a pesar de que tome algún tiempo.Para ayudarse a sí mismo:Si no está seguro de dónde obtener ayuda, consulte con su médico de cabecera, visite la página en inglés del NIMH de ayuda para las enfermedades mentales (www.nimh.nih.gov/health/find-help/index.shtml), o póngase en contacto con alguien de uno de los grupos que figuran a continuación:Si usted o alguien que conoce está pensando hacerse daño, obtenga ayuda de inmediato:En la última década, los investigadores se han concentrado en entender las bases mentales y biológicas del trastorno por estrés postraumático. También han estado observando por qué las personas presentan una serie de reacciones a las situaciones traumáticas. Los investigadores financiados por el NIMH están trabajando:En la medida que las investigaciones genéticas y las tecnologías de imágenes cerebrales continúen mejorando, es más probable que los científicos puedan determinar cuándo y en qué parte del cerebro comienza el trastorno por estrés postraumático. Este conocimiento puede conducir a tratamientos mejor orientados a satisfacer las necesidades propias de cada persona o, incluso, a prevenir la enfermedad antes de que haga daño.Para más información sobre las investigaciones del trastorno por estrés postraumático, por favor visite el sitio web en inglés del NIMH de ensayos clínicos sobre este trastorno (http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/trials/post-traumatic-stress-disorder-ptsd.shtml).Si no tiene acceso al Internet y desea información sobre el trastorno por estrés postraumático, por favor comuníquese con el Centro de Recursos de Información del NIMH al 1–866–615–6464 o envíe un correo electrónico a nimhinfo@nih.gov.Esta publicación es del dominio público y se puede reproducir o copiar sin necesidad de pedir permiso al NIMH. Le agradecemos que cite al Instituto Nacional de la Salud Mental como fuente de la información. El NIMH le anima a reproducir y usar esta publicación en sus iniciativas para mejorar la salud pública. Sin embargo, el uso de materiales gubernamentales de manera inapropiada puede generar dudas legales o éticas, por lo que le pedimos que use las siguientes pautas:Si tiene alguna pregunta acerca de estas pautas y del uso de las publicaciones del NIMH, por favor comuníquese con el Centro de Recursos de Información del NIMH al 1–866–615–6464 o envíe un correo electrónico a nimhinfo@nih.gov.Si desea obtener información adicional sobre los problemas que afectan la salud mental, o averiguar sobre recursos e investigaciones relacionados con la salud mental, visite http://espanol.mentalhealth.gov o el sitio web del NIMH en www.nimh.nih.gov. Asimismo, el sitio web de MedlinePlus (http://medlineplus.gov/spanish), un servicio de la Biblioteca Nacional de medicina, tiene información sobre una gran variedad de temas de salud, incluyendo los problemas que afectan la salud mental.Instituto Nacional de la Salud Mental Oficina de Política Científica, Planificación y Comunicaciones División de Redacción Científica, Prensa y Difusión 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Teléfono: 301–443–4513 o  1–866–615–6464 (1–866–615–NIMH)*  Teléfono para personas con problemas auditivos:  301–443–8431 o 1–866–415–8051* Fax: 301–443–4279 Correo electrónico: nimhinfo@nih.gov  Sitios web: http://www.nimh.nih.gov (inglés) o http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/espanol/index.shtml (español)*Las llamadas a los números telefónicos que empiezan con 1–866 son gratuitas para quienes viven en los Estados Unidos.  DEPARTAMENTO DE SALUD Y SERVICIOS HUMANOS DE LOS ESTADOS UNIDOS Institutos Nacionales de la Salud Publicación de NIH Núm. SQF 16-6388 Traducida en diciembre del 2016The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuEste folleto ofrece información a los diferentes miembros de la comunidad sobre lo que pueden hacer para ayudar a los niños y adolescentes a superar actos de violencia, desastres naturales y otras experiencias traumáticas.In EnglishLeer másEste folleto ofrece información a los padres sobre lo que pueden hacer para ayudar a los niños y adolescentes a superar actos de violencia, desastres naturales y otras experiencias traumáticas.In EnglishLeer másEste folleto ofrece información a la policía, los bomberos, los socorristas y otros trabajadores de rescate sobre lo que pueden hacer para ayudar a los niños y adolescentes a superar actos de violencia, desastres naturales y otras experiencias traumáticas.In EnglishLeer másFolleto sobre el trastorno por estrés postraumático que describe lo que es, a quién le da, los síntomas, el tratamiento, el trastorno por estrés postraumático en los niños y en los adultos, dónde conseguir ayuda y la futura dirección de las investigaciones sobre este trastorno.In EnglishLeer másThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuThis brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).En EspañolRead moreThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuThis factsheet discusses five things to know about stress and how to manage it.En EspañolRead moreThis brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).En EspañolRead moreThis brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a chronic disorder in which a person has uncontrollable, reoccurring thoughts and behaviors.En EspañolRead moreThis brochure discusses symptoms, causes, and treatments for panic disorder, a type of anxiety disorder associated with sudden and repeated attacks of fear.En EspañolRead moreThis brochure discusses symptoms, causes, and treatments for social anxiety disorder (also called social phobia), a type of anxiety disorder associated with intense, persistent fear of being watched and judged by others.En EspañolRead moreThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuThis factsheet discusses five things to know about stress and how to manage it.En EspañolRead moreThis brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).En EspañolRead moreThis brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a chronic disorder in which a person has uncontrollable, reoccurring thoughts and behaviors.En EspañolRead moreThis brochure discusses symptoms, causes, and treatments for panic disorder, a type of anxiety disorder associated with sudden and repeated attacks of fear.En EspañolRead moreThis brochure discusses symptoms, causes, and treatments for social anxiety disorder (also called social phobia), a type of anxiety disorder associated with intense, persistent fear of being watched and judged by others.En EspañolRead moreThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuEach year, children experience violence and disaster and face other traumas. Young people are injured, they see others harmed by violence, they suffer sexual abuse, and they lose loved ones or witness other tragic and shocking events. Parents and caregivers can help children overcome these experiences and start the process of recovery.“Trauma” is often thought of as physical injuries. Psychological trauma is an emotionally painful, shocking, stressful, and sometimes life-threatening experience. It may or may not involve physical injuries, and can result from witnessing distressing events. Examples include a natural disaster, physical or sexual abuse, and terrorism.Disasters such as hurricanes, earthquakes, and floods can claim lives, destroy homes or whole communities, and cause serious physical and psychological injuries. Trauma can also be caused by acts of violence. The September 11, 2001 terrorist attack is one example. Mass shootings in schools or communities and physical or sexual assault are other examples. Traumatic events threaten our sense of safety.Reactions (responses) to trauma can be immediate or delayed. Reactions to trauma differ in severity and cover a wide range of behaviors and responses. Children with existing mental health problems, past traumatic experiences, and/or limited family and social supports may be more reactive to trauma. Frequently experienced responses among children after trauma are loss of trust and a fear of the event happening again.It’s important to remember:Children age 5 and under may react in a number of ways including:Children age 6 to 11 may react by:Adolescents age 12 to 17 may react by:Adolescents may feel guilty. They may feel guilt for not preventing injury or deaths. They also may have thoughts of revenge.After violence or disaster, parents and family members should identify and address their own feelings — this will allow them to help others. Explain to children what happened and let them know:Do:Don’t:Other tips:Helping children can start immediately, even at the scene of the event. Most children recover within a few weeks of a traumatic experience, while some may need help longer. Grief, a deep emotional response to loss, may take months to resolve. Children may experience grief over the loss of a loved one, teacher, friend, or pet. Grief may be re-experienced or worsened by news reports or the event’s anniversary.Some children may need help from a mental health professional. Some people may seek other kinds of help from community leaders. Identify children who need support and help them obtain it.Examples of problematic behaviors could be:Adult helpers should:Pay attention to childrenReduce effects of other stressors, such asMonitor healingRemind children that adultsParents and caregivers should also limit viewing of repetitive news reports about traumatic events. Young children may not understand that news coverage is about one event and not multiple similar events.There are steps adults can take following a disaster that can help them cope, making it easier for them to provide better care for children. These include creating safe conditions, remaining calm and friendly, and connecting with others. Being sensitive to people under stress and respecting their decisions is important.When possible, help people:Don’t:Some children will have prolonged mental health problems after a traumatic event. These may include grief, depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Some trauma survivors get better with some support. Others may need prolonged care from a mental health professional. If after a month in a safe environment children are not able to perform normal routines or new behavioral or emotional problems develop, then contact a health professional.Factors influencing how someone may respond include:Some symptoms may require immediate attention. Contact a mental health professional if these symptoms occur:Access to disaster help and resources: Website: http://www.disasterassistance.govCenters for Disease Control and Prevention Website: http://emergency.cdc.gov/mentalhealthFederal Emergency Management Agency Phone: 1-800-480-2520 Website: http://www.ready.gov/kidsNational Center for PTSD Website: http://www.ptsd.va.govThe National Child Traumatic Stress Network Website: http://www.nctsn.orgSubstance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration Disaster Distress Helpline Phone: 1-800-985-5990 Website: http://www.disasterdistress.samhsa.govUniformed Services University of the Health Sciences Center for the Study of Traumatic Stress Website: http://cstsonline.orgU.S. Department of Justice Office for Victims of Crime Website: http://www.ovc.gov/help/index.htmlIf you or someone you know is in crisis or thinking of suicide, get help quickly.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at http://www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892–9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govThis publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. Citation of the National Institute of Mental Health as a source is appreciated. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to use these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or email at nimhinfo@nih.gov.U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. 15–3518 Revised 2015The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuEach year, children experience violence and disaster and face other traumas. Young people are injured, they see others harmed by violence, they suffer sexual abuse, and they lose loved ones or witness other tragic and shocking events. Parents and caregivers can help children overcome these experiences and start the process of recovery.“Trauma” is often thought of as physical injuries. Psychological trauma is an emotionally painful, shocking, stressful, and sometimes life-threatening experience. It may or may not involve physical injuries, and can result from witnessing distressing events. Examples include a natural disaster, physical or sexual abuse, and terrorism.Disasters such as hurricanes, earthquakes, and floods can claim lives, destroy homes or whole communities, and cause serious physical and psychological injuries. Trauma can also be caused by acts of violence. The September 11, 2001 terrorist attack is one example. Mass shootings in schools or communities and physical or sexual assault are other examples. Traumatic events threaten our sense of safety.Reactions (responses) to trauma can be immediate or delayed. Reactions to trauma differ in severity and cover a wide range of behaviors and responses. Children with existing mental health problems, past traumatic experiences, and/or limited family and social supports may be more reactive to trauma. Frequently experienced responses among children after trauma are loss of trust and a fear of the event happening again.It’s important to remember:Children age 5 and under may react in a number of ways including:Children age 6 to 11 may react by:Adolescents age 12 to 17 may react by:Adolescents may feel guilty. They may feel guilt for not preventing injury or deaths. They also may have thoughts of revenge.After violence or disaster, parents and family members should identify and address their own feelings — this will allow them to help others. Explain to children what happened and let them know:Do:Don’t:Other tips:Helping children can start immediately, even at the scene of the event. Most children recover within a few weeks of a traumatic experience, while some may need help longer. Grief, a deep emotional response to loss, may take months to resolve. Children may experience grief over the loss of a loved one, teacher, friend, or pet. Grief may be re-experienced or worsened by news reports or the event’s anniversary.Some children may need help from a mental health professional. Some people may seek other kinds of help from community leaders. Identify children who need support and help them obtain it.Examples of problematic behaviors could be:Adult helpers should:Pay attention to childrenReduce effects of other stressors, such asMonitor healingRemind children that adultsParents and caregivers should also limit viewing of repetitive news reports about traumatic events. Young children may not understand that news coverage is about one event and not multiple similar events.There are steps adults can take following a disaster that can help them cope, making it easier for them to provide better care for children. These include creating safe conditions, remaining calm and friendly, and connecting with others. Being sensitive to people under stress and respecting their decisions is important.When possible, help people:Don’t:Some children will have prolonged mental health problems after a traumatic event. These may include grief, depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Some trauma survivors get better with some support. Others may need prolonged care from a mental health professional. If after a month in a safe environment children are not able to perform normal routines or new behavioral or emotional problems develop, then contact a health professional.Factors influencing how someone may respond include:Some symptoms may require immediate attention. Contact a mental health professional if these symptoms occur:Access to disaster help and resources: Website: http://www.disasterassistance.govCenters for Disease Control and Prevention Website: http://emergency.cdc.gov/mentalhealthFederal Emergency Management Agency Phone: 1-800-480-2520 Website: http://www.ready.gov/kidsNational Center for PTSD Website: http://www.ptsd.va.govThe National Child Traumatic Stress Network Website: http://www.nctsn.orgSubstance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration Disaster Distress Helpline Phone: 1-800-985-5990 Website: http://www.disasterdistress.samhsa.govUniformed Services University of the Health Sciences Center for the Study of Traumatic Stress Website: http://cstsonline.orgU.S. Department of Justice Office for Victims of Crime Website: http://www.ovc.gov/help/index.htmlIf you or someone you know is in crisis or thinking of suicide, get help quickly.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at http://www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892–9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govThis publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. Citation of the National Institute of Mental Health as a source is appreciated. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to use these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or email at nimhinfo@nih.gov.U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. 15–3518 Revised 2015The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuMen and women both experience depression but their symptoms can be very different. Because men who are depressed may appear to be angry or aggressive instead of sad, their families, friends, and even their doctors may not always recognize the anger or aggression as depression symptoms. In addition, men are less likely than women to recognize, talk about, and seek treatment for depression. Yet depression affects a large number of men.Everyone feels sad or irritable and has trouble sleeping once in a while. But these feelings and troubles usually pass after a couple of days. Depression is a common but serious mood disorder that may cause severe symptoms. Depression affects the ability to feel, think, and handle daily activities. Also known as major depressive disorder or clinical depression, a man must have symptoms for at least two weeks to be diagnosed with depression.Both men and women get depression but their willingness to talk about their feelings may be very different. This is one of the reasons that depression symptoms for men and women may be very different as well.For example, some men with depression hide their emotions and may seem to be angry, irritable, or aggressive while many women seem sad or express sadness. Men with depression may feel very tired and lose interest in work, family, or hobbies. They may be more likely to have difficulty sleeping than women who have depression. Sometimes mental health symptoms appear to be physical issues. For example, a racing heart, tightening chest, ongoing headaches, or digestive issues can be signs of a mental health problem. Many men are more likely to see their doctor about physical symptoms than emotional symptoms.Some men may turn to drugs or alcohol to try to cope with their emotional symptoms. Also, while women with depression are more likely to attempt suicide, men are more likely to die by suicide because they tend to use more lethal methods.Depression can affect any man at any age. With the right treatment, most men with depression can get better and gain back their interest in work, family, and hobbies."My daily routine was shot. I didn't have the energy to do anything. I got up because the dog had to be walked and my wife needed to go to work. The day would go by and I didn't know where it went. I wanted to get back to normal. I just wanted to be myself again." —Jimmy, FirefighterDifferent men have different symptoms, but some common depression symptoms include:Not every man who is depressed experiences every symptom. Some men experience only a few symptoms while others may experience many.The most common types of depression are:Depression is one of the most common mental disorders in the U.S. Current research suggests that depression is caused by a combination of risk factors including:Men often avoid addressing their feelings and, in many cases, friends and family members are the first to recognize that their loved one is depressed. It is important that friends and family support their loved one and encourage him to visit a doctor or mental health professional for an evaluation. A health professional can do an exam or lab tests to rule out other conditions that may have symptoms that are like those of depression. He or she also can tell if certain medications are affecting the depression.The doctor needs to get a complete history of symptoms, such as when they started, how long they have lasted, how bad they are, whether they have occurred before, and if so, how they were treated. It is important that the man seeking help be open and honest about any efforts at “self-medication” with alcohol, non-prescribed drugs, gambling, or high-risk activities. A complete history should include information about a family history of depression or other mental disorders.After a diagnosis, depression is usually treated with medications or psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. The increasingly-popular “collaborative care” approach combines physical and behavioral health care. Collaborative care involves a team of health care providers and managers, including a primary care doctor and specialists.Medications called antidepressants can work well to treat depression, but they can take several weeks to be effective. Often with medication, symptoms such as sleep, appetite, and concentration problems improve before mood lifts, so it is important to give medication a chance before deciding whether it is effective or not.Antidepressants can have side effects including:Most side effects lessen over time but it is important to talk with your doctor about any side effects that you may have. Starting antidepressant medication at a low dose and gradually increasing to a full therapeutic dose may help minimize adverse effects.It's important to know that although antidepressants can be safe and effective for many people, they may present serious risks to some, especially children, teens, and young adults. A "black box" warning—the most serious type of warning that a prescription drug can have—has been added to the labels of antidepressant medications to warn people that antidepressants may cause some young people to have suicidal thoughts or may increase the risk for suicide attempts. This is especially true for those who become agitated when they first start taking the medication and before it begins to work. Anyone taking antidepressants should be monitored closely, especially when they first start taking them.For most people, though, the risks of untreated depression far outweigh those of taking antidepressant medications under a doctor's supervision. Careful monitoring by a health professional will also minimize any potential risks.For reasons that are not well-understood, many people respond better to some antidepressants than to others. If a man does not respond to one medication, his doctor may suggest trying another. Sometimes, a medication may be only partially effective. In that case, another medication might be added to help make the antidepressant more effective.If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. Sometimes people taking antidepressants feel better and then stop taking the medication on their own, and the depression returns. When it is time to stop the medication, usually after a course of 6 to 12 months, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Some people who relapse back into depression after stopping an antidepressant benefit from staying on medication for additional months or years.Several types of psychotherapy or “talk therapy” can help treat depression. Some therapies are just as effective as medications for certain types of depression. Therapy helps by teaching new ways of thinking and behaving, and changing habits that may be contributing to the depression. Therapy can also help men understand and work through difficult situations or relationships that may be causing their depression or making it worse.Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), interpersonal therapy (IPT), and problem-solving therapy are examples of evidence-based talk therapy treatments for depression.Treatment for depression should be personalized. Some men, might try therapy first and add antidepressant medication later if it is needed. Others might start treatment with both medication and psychotherapy.Brain stimulation treatments can be considered when other approaches are unsuccessful or unwanted. One of the oldest treatments in psychiatry, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), is still used today. Generally, ECT is used in cases of severe depression that do not respond to multiple courses of antidepressants, or where there is a great need for rapid relief. For example, ECT might be considered if someone has strong suicidal thoughts or plans, or has stopped eating and drinking adequately. Advances in ECT make it safe and effective for most individuals, however, concern over possible memory loss and continuing stigma have limited its availability and acceptability in some places. ECT is generally considered the “gold standard” treatment of severe depression.Another type of brain stimulation using a magnetic stimulus is known as transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). TMS is an approved depression treatment and has been used for nearly a decade. TMS is a less powerful treatment than ECT, but a series of near-daily TMS sessions over several weeks is helpful for at least half the people who complete a full series. For more information about brain stimulation therapies, visit www.nimh.nih.gov (search: brain stimulation therapies)."I lost interest in the kids and doing things that we used to do…they'd ask their mother, ‘Why is Daddy not getting up and not wanting to do anything with us? Did we do something wrong?’ They didn't do anything to me. I just didn't want to do anything." —Rene, Police OfficerIt’s important to remember that a person with depression cannot simply "snap out of it." It is also important to know that he may not recognize his symptoms and may not want to get professional treatment.If you think someone has depression, you can support him by helping him find a doctor or mental health professional and then helping him make an appointment. Even men who have trouble recognizing that they are depressed may agree to seek help for physical symptoms, such as feeling tired or run down. They may be willing to talk with their regular health professional about a new difficulty they are having at work or losing interest in doing things they usually enjoy. Talking with a primary care provider may be a good first step toward learning about and treating possible depression.Other things that may help include:As you continue treatment, gradually you will start to feel better. Remember that if you are taking an antidepressant, it may take several weeks for it to start working. Try to do things that you used to enjoy before you had depression. Go easy on yourself.If you are unsure of where to go for help, ask your family doctor or health care provider. You can also find resources online including the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov/FindHelp, or check with your insurance carrier to find someone who participates in your plan. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency.Men with depression are at risk for suicide. If you or someone you know is in crisis, get help quickly.In many instances, a crisis can be avoided when friends or family members are involved in the treatment and can recognize crisis warning signs. Crisis warning signs are different for different people. One person may have more trouble sleeping and become more agitated. Another person may sleep more, stop eating, and focus on disturbing thoughts. Creating a plan that lists the loved one’s warning signs—those actions that usually occur before a crisis—and the health care provider’s contact information may help avoid a crisis."It starts slowly and the only person you're talking to is yourself. You're lost. It's dark, the pain is 24/7... you just want it to end... I'd drink and... I tried to numb my head... but you have to deal with it. It doesn't just go away." —Patrick, Retired Sergeant"It affects the way you think. It affects the way you feel. It affects the way you love... It's just a blanket that covers everything... and it's one that's just so asphyxiating. And at times you just say it's enough already. It just feels like enough." —Steve, WriterFor more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, visit https://www.mentalhealth.gov, or visit the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus  service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning and Communications Science Writing, Press and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free FAX: 301-443-4279 E-mail: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govNIMH publications are in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission. NIMH encourages you to reproduce them and use them in your efforts to improve public health. Citation of the National Institute of Mental Health as a source is appreciated.Using government materials inappropriately, however, can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to follow these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or at nimhinfo@nih.gov.National Institute of Mental Health U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. QF 17-5300 Revised January 2017 QR CodeThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuMen and women both experience depression but their symptoms can be very different. Because men who are depressed may appear to be angry or aggressive instead of sad, their families, friends, and even their doctors may not always recognize the anger or aggression as depression symptoms. In addition, men are less likely than women to recognize, talk about, and seek treatment for depression. Yet depression affects a large number of men.Everyone feels sad or irritable and has trouble sleeping once in a while. But these feelings and troubles usually pass after a couple of days. Depression is a common but serious mood disorder that may cause severe symptoms. Depression affects the ability to feel, think, and handle daily activities. Also known as major depressive disorder or clinical depression, a man must have symptoms for at least two weeks to be diagnosed with depression.Both men and women get depression but their willingness to talk about their feelings may be very different. This is one of the reasons that depression symptoms for men and women may be very different as well.For example, some men with depression hide their emotions and may seem to be angry, irritable, or aggressive while many women seem sad or express sadness. Men with depression may feel very tired and lose interest in work, family, or hobbies. They may be more likely to have difficulty sleeping than women who have depression. Sometimes mental health symptoms appear to be physical issues. For example, a racing heart, tightening chest, ongoing headaches, or digestive issues can be signs of a mental health problem. Many men are more likely to see their doctor about physical symptoms than emotional symptoms.Some men may turn to drugs or alcohol to try to cope with their emotional symptoms. Also, while women with depression are more likely to attempt suicide, men are more likely to die by suicide because they tend to use more lethal methods.Depression can affect any man at any age. With the right treatment, most men with depression can get better and gain back their interest in work, family, and hobbies."My daily routine was shot. I didn't have the energy to do anything. I got up because the dog had to be walked and my wife needed to go to work. The day would go by and I didn't know where it went. I wanted to get back to normal. I just wanted to be myself again." —Jimmy, FirefighterDifferent men have different symptoms, but some common depression symptoms include:Not every man who is depressed experiences every symptom. Some men experience only a few symptoms while others may experience many.The most common types of depression are:Depression is one of the most common mental disorders in the U.S. Current research suggests that depression is caused by a combination of risk factors including:Men often avoid addressing their feelings and, in many cases, friends and family members are the first to recognize that their loved one is depressed. It is important that friends and family support their loved one and encourage him to visit a doctor or mental health professional for an evaluation. A health professional can do an exam or lab tests to rule out other conditions that may have symptoms that are like those of depression. He or she also can tell if certain medications are affecting the depression.The doctor needs to get a complete history of symptoms, such as when they started, how long they have lasted, how bad they are, whether they have occurred before, and if so, how they were treated. It is important that the man seeking help be open and honest about any efforts at “self-medication” with alcohol, non-prescribed drugs, gambling, or high-risk activities. A complete history should include information about a family history of depression or other mental disorders.After a diagnosis, depression is usually treated with medications or psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. The increasingly-popular “collaborative care” approach combines physical and behavioral health care. Collaborative care involves a team of health care providers and managers, including a primary care doctor and specialists.Medications called antidepressants can work well to treat depression, but they can take several weeks to be effective. Often with medication, symptoms such as sleep, appetite, and concentration problems improve before mood lifts, so it is important to give medication a chance before deciding whether it is effective or not.Antidepressants can have side effects including:Most side effects lessen over time but it is important to talk with your doctor about any side effects that you may have. Starting antidepressant medication at a low dose and gradually increasing to a full therapeutic dose may help minimize adverse effects.It's important to know that although antidepressants can be safe and effective for many people, they may present serious risks to some, especially children, teens, and young adults. A "black box" warning—the most serious type of warning that a prescription drug can have—has been added to the labels of antidepressant medications to warn people that antidepressants may cause some young people to have suicidal thoughts or may increase the risk for suicide attempts. This is especially true for those who become agitated when they first start taking the medication and before it begins to work. Anyone taking antidepressants should be monitored closely, especially when they first start taking them.For most people, though, the risks of untreated depression far outweigh those of taking antidepressant medications under a doctor's supervision. Careful monitoring by a health professional will also minimize any potential risks.For reasons that are not well-understood, many people respond better to some antidepressants than to others. If a man does not respond to one medication, his doctor may suggest trying another. Sometimes, a medication may be only partially effective. In that case, another medication might be added to help make the antidepressant more effective.If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. Sometimes people taking antidepressants feel better and then stop taking the medication on their own, and the depression returns. When it is time to stop the medication, usually after a course of 6 to 12 months, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Some people who relapse back into depression after stopping an antidepressant benefit from staying on medication for additional months or years.Several types of psychotherapy or “talk therapy” can help treat depression. Some therapies are just as effective as medications for certain types of depression. Therapy helps by teaching new ways of thinking and behaving, and changing habits that may be contributing to the depression. Therapy can also help men understand and work through difficult situations or relationships that may be causing their depression or making it worse.Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), interpersonal therapy (IPT), and problem-solving therapy are examples of evidence-based talk therapy treatments for depression.Treatment for depression should be personalized. Some men, might try therapy first and add antidepressant medication later if it is needed. Others might start treatment with both medication and psychotherapy.Brain stimulation treatments can be considered when other approaches are unsuccessful or unwanted. One of the oldest treatments in psychiatry, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), is still used today. Generally, ECT is used in cases of severe depression that do not respond to multiple courses of antidepressants, or where there is a great need for rapid relief. For example, ECT might be considered if someone has strong suicidal thoughts or plans, or has stopped eating and drinking adequately. Advances in ECT make it safe and effective for most individuals, however, concern over possible memory loss and continuing stigma have limited its availability and acceptability in some places. ECT is generally considered the “gold standard” treatment of severe depression.Another type of brain stimulation using a magnetic stimulus is known as transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). TMS is an approved depression treatment and has been used for nearly a decade. TMS is a less powerful treatment than ECT, but a series of near-daily TMS sessions over several weeks is helpful for at least half the people who complete a full series. For more information about brain stimulation therapies, visit www.nimh.nih.gov (search: brain stimulation therapies)."I lost interest in the kids and doing things that we used to do…they'd ask their mother, ‘Why is Daddy not getting up and not wanting to do anything with us? Did we do something wrong?’ They didn't do anything to me. I just didn't want to do anything." —Rene, Police OfficerIt’s important to remember that a person with depression cannot simply "snap out of it." It is also important to know that he may not recognize his symptoms and may not want to get professional treatment.If you think someone has depression, you can support him by helping him find a doctor or mental health professional and then helping him make an appointment. Even men who have trouble recognizing that they are depressed may agree to seek help for physical symptoms, such as feeling tired or run down. They may be willing to talk with their regular health professional about a new difficulty they are having at work or losing interest in doing things they usually enjoy. Talking with a primary care provider may be a good first step toward learning about and treating possible depression.Other things that may help include:As you continue treatment, gradually you will start to feel better. Remember that if you are taking an antidepressant, it may take several weeks for it to start working. Try to do things that you used to enjoy before you had depression. Go easy on yourself.If you are unsure of where to go for help, ask your family doctor or health care provider. You can also find resources online including the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov/FindHelp, or check with your insurance carrier to find someone who participates in your plan. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency.Men with depression are at risk for suicide. If you or someone you know is in crisis, get help quickly.In many instances, a crisis can be avoided when friends or family members are involved in the treatment and can recognize crisis warning signs. Crisis warning signs are different for different people. One person may have more trouble sleeping and become more agitated. Another person may sleep more, stop eating, and focus on disturbing thoughts. Creating a plan that lists the loved one’s warning signs—those actions that usually occur before a crisis—and the health care provider’s contact information may help avoid a crisis."It starts slowly and the only person you're talking to is yourself. You're lost. It's dark, the pain is 24/7... you just want it to end... I'd drink and... I tried to numb my head... but you have to deal with it. It doesn't just go away." —Patrick, Retired Sergeant"It affects the way you think. It affects the way you feel. It affects the way you love... It's just a blanket that covers everything... and it's one that's just so asphyxiating. And at times you just say it's enough already. It just feels like enough." —Steve, WriterFor more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, visit https://www.mentalhealth.gov, or visit the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus  service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning and Communications Science Writing, Press and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free FAX: 301-443-4279 E-mail: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govNIMH publications are in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission. NIMH encourages you to reproduce them and use them in your efforts to improve public health. Citation of the National Institute of Mental Health as a source is appreciated.Using government materials inappropriately, however, can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to follow these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or at nimhinfo@nih.gov.National Institute of Mental Health U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. QF 17-5300 Revised January 2017 QR CodeThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuMen and women both experience depression but their symptoms can be very different. Because men who are depressed may appear to be angry or aggressive instead of sad, their families, friends, and even their doctors may not always recognize the anger or aggression as depression symptoms. In addition, men are less likely than women to recognize, talk about, and seek treatment for depression. Yet depression affects a large number of men.Everyone feels sad or irritable and has trouble sleeping once in a while. But these feelings and troubles usually pass after a couple of days. Depression is a common but serious mood disorder that may cause severe symptoms. Depression affects the ability to feel, think, and handle daily activities. Also known as major depressive disorder or clinical depression, a man must have symptoms for at least two weeks to be diagnosed with depression.Both men and women get depression but their willingness to talk about their feelings may be very different. This is one of the reasons that depression symptoms for men and women may be very different as well.For example, some men with depression hide their emotions and may seem to be angry, irritable, or aggressive while many women seem sad or express sadness. Men with depression may feel very tired and lose interest in work, family, or hobbies. They may be more likely to have difficulty sleeping than women who have depression. Sometimes mental health symptoms appear to be physical issues. For example, a racing heart, tightening chest, ongoing headaches, or digestive issues can be signs of a mental health problem. Many men are more likely to see their doctor about physical symptoms than emotional symptoms.Some men may turn to drugs or alcohol to try to cope with their emotional symptoms. Also, while women with depression are more likely to attempt suicide, men are more likely to die by suicide because they tend to use more lethal methods.Depression can affect any man at any age. With the right treatment, most men with depression can get better and gain back their interest in work, family, and hobbies."My daily routine was shot. I didn't have the energy to do anything. I got up because the dog had to be walked and my wife needed to go to work. The day would go by and I didn't know where it went. I wanted to get back to normal. I just wanted to be myself again." —Jimmy, FirefighterDifferent men have different symptoms, but some common depression symptoms include:Not every man who is depressed experiences every symptom. Some men experience only a few symptoms while others may experience many.The most common types of depression are:Depression is one of the most common mental disorders in the U.S. Current research suggests that depression is caused by a combination of risk factors including:Men often avoid addressing their feelings and, in many cases, friends and family members are the first to recognize that their loved one is depressed. It is important that friends and family support their loved one and encourage him to visit a doctor or mental health professional for an evaluation. A health professional can do an exam or lab tests to rule out other conditions that may have symptoms that are like those of depression. He or she also can tell if certain medications are affecting the depression.The doctor needs to get a complete history of symptoms, such as when they started, how long they have lasted, how bad they are, whether they have occurred before, and if so, how they were treated. It is important that the man seeking help be open and honest about any efforts at “self-medication” with alcohol, non-prescribed drugs, gambling, or high-risk activities. A complete history should include information about a family history of depression or other mental disorders.After a diagnosis, depression is usually treated with medications or psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. The increasingly-popular “collaborative care” approach combines physical and behavioral health care. Collaborative care involves a team of health care providers and managers, including a primary care doctor and specialists.Medications called antidepressants can work well to treat depression, but they can take several weeks to be effective. Often with medication, symptoms such as sleep, appetite, and concentration problems improve before mood lifts, so it is important to give medication a chance before deciding whether it is effective or not.Antidepressants can have side effects including:Most side effects lessen over time but it is important to talk with your doctor about any side effects that you may have. Starting antidepressant medication at a low dose and gradually increasing to a full therapeutic dose may help minimize adverse effects.It's important to know that although antidepressants can be safe and effective for many people, they may present serious risks to some, especially children, teens, and young adults. A "black box" warning—the most serious type of warning that a prescription drug can have—has been added to the labels of antidepressant medications to warn people that antidepressants may cause some young people to have suicidal thoughts or may increase the risk for suicide attempts. This is especially true for those who become agitated when they first start taking the medication and before it begins to work. Anyone taking antidepressants should be monitored closely, especially when they first start taking them.For most people, though, the risks of untreated depression far outweigh those of taking antidepressant medications under a doctor's supervision. Careful monitoring by a health professional will also minimize any potential risks.For reasons that are not well-understood, many people respond better to some antidepressants than to others. If a man does not respond to one medication, his doctor may suggest trying another. Sometimes, a medication may be only partially effective. In that case, another medication might be added to help make the antidepressant more effective.If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. Sometimes people taking antidepressants feel better and then stop taking the medication on their own, and the depression returns. When it is time to stop the medication, usually after a course of 6 to 12 months, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Some people who relapse back into depression after stopping an antidepressant benefit from staying on medication for additional months or years.Several types of psychotherapy or “talk therapy” can help treat depression. Some therapies are just as effective as medications for certain types of depression. Therapy helps by teaching new ways of thinking and behaving, and changing habits that may be contributing to the depression. Therapy can also help men understand and work through difficult situations or relationships that may be causing their depression or making it worse.Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), interpersonal therapy (IPT), and problem-solving therapy are examples of evidence-based talk therapy treatments for depression.Treatment for depression should be personalized. Some men, might try therapy first and add antidepressant medication later if it is needed. Others might start treatment with both medication and psychotherapy.Brain stimulation treatments can be considered when other approaches are unsuccessful or unwanted. One of the oldest treatments in psychiatry, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), is still used today. Generally, ECT is used in cases of severe depression that do not respond to multiple courses of antidepressants, or where there is a great need for rapid relief. For example, ECT might be considered if someone has strong suicidal thoughts or plans, or has stopped eating and drinking adequately. Advances in ECT make it safe and effective for most individuals, however, concern over possible memory loss and continuing stigma have limited its availability and acceptability in some places. ECT is generally considered the “gold standard” treatment of severe depression.Another type of brain stimulation using a magnetic stimulus is known as transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). TMS is an approved depression treatment and has been used for nearly a decade. TMS is a less powerful treatment than ECT, but a series of near-daily TMS sessions over several weeks is helpful for at least half the people who complete a full series. For more information about brain stimulation therapies, visit www.nimh.nih.gov (search: brain stimulation therapies)."I lost interest in the kids and doing things that we used to do…they'd ask their mother, ‘Why is Daddy not getting up and not wanting to do anything with us? Did we do something wrong?’ They didn't do anything to me. I just didn't want to do anything." —Rene, Police OfficerIt’s important to remember that a person with depression cannot simply "snap out of it." It is also important to know that he may not recognize his symptoms and may not want to get professional treatment.If you think someone has depression, you can support him by helping him find a doctor or mental health professional and then helping him make an appointment. Even men who have trouble recognizing that they are depressed may agree to seek help for physical symptoms, such as feeling tired or run down. They may be willing to talk with their regular health professional about a new difficulty they are having at work or losing interest in doing things they usually enjoy. Talking with a primary care provider may be a good first step toward learning about and treating possible depression.Other things that may help include:As you continue treatment, gradually you will start to feel better. Remember that if you are taking an antidepressant, it may take several weeks for it to start working. Try to do things that you used to enjoy before you had depression. Go easy on yourself.If you are unsure of where to go for help, ask your family doctor or health care provider. You can also find resources online including the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov/FindHelp, or check with your insurance carrier to find someone who participates in your plan. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency.Men with depression are at risk for suicide. If you or someone you know is in crisis, get help quickly.In many instances, a crisis can be avoided when friends or family members are involved in the treatment and can recognize crisis warning signs. Crisis warning signs are different for different people. One person may have more trouble sleeping and become more agitated. Another person may sleep more, stop eating, and focus on disturbing thoughts. Creating a plan that lists the loved one’s warning signs—those actions that usually occur before a crisis—and the health care provider’s contact information may help avoid a crisis."It starts slowly and the only person you're talking to is yourself. You're lost. It's dark, the pain is 24/7... you just want it to end... I'd drink and... I tried to numb my head... but you have to deal with it. It doesn't just go away." —Patrick, Retired Sergeant"It affects the way you think. It affects the way you feel. It affects the way you love... It's just a blanket that covers everything... and it's one that's just so asphyxiating. And at times you just say it's enough already. It just feels like enough." —Steve, WriterFor more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, visit https://www.mentalhealth.gov, or visit the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus  service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning and Communications Science Writing, Press and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free FAX: 301-443-4279 E-mail: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govNIMH publications are in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission. NIMH encourages you to reproduce them and use them in your efforts to improve public health. Citation of the National Institute of Mental Health as a source is appreciated.Using government materials inappropriately, however, can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to follow these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or at nimhinfo@nih.gov.National Institute of Mental Health U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. QF 17-5300 Revised January 2017 QR CodeThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuMen and women both experience depression but their symptoms can be very different. Because men who are depressed may appear to be angry or aggressive instead of sad, their families, friends, and even their doctors may not always recognize the anger or aggression as depression symptoms. In addition, men are less likely than women to recognize, talk about, and seek treatment for depression. Yet depression affects a large number of men.Everyone feels sad or irritable and has trouble sleeping once in a while. But these feelings and troubles usually pass after a couple of days. Depression is a common but serious mood disorder that may cause severe symptoms. Depression affects the ability to feel, think, and handle daily activities. Also known as major depressive disorder or clinical depression, a man must have symptoms for at least two weeks to be diagnosed with depression.Both men and women get depression but their willingness to talk about their feelings may be very different. This is one of the reasons that depression symptoms for men and women may be very different as well.For example, some men with depression hide their emotions and may seem to be angry, irritable, or aggressive while many women seem sad or express sadness. Men with depression may feel very tired and lose interest in work, family, or hobbies. They may be more likely to have difficulty sleeping than women who have depression. Sometimes mental health symptoms appear to be physical issues. For example, a racing heart, tightening chest, ongoing headaches, or digestive issues can be signs of a mental health problem. Many men are more likely to see their doctor about physical symptoms than emotional symptoms.Some men may turn to drugs or alcohol to try to cope with their emotional symptoms. Also, while women with depression are more likely to attempt suicide, men are more likely to die by suicide because they tend to use more lethal methods.Depression can affect any man at any age. With the right treatment, most men with depression can get better and gain back their interest in work, family, and hobbies."My daily routine was shot. I didn't have the energy to do anything. I got up because the dog had to be walked and my wife needed to go to work. The day would go by and I didn't know where it went. I wanted to get back to normal. I just wanted to be myself again." —Jimmy, FirefighterDifferent men have different symptoms, but some common depression symptoms include:Not every man who is depressed experiences every symptom. Some men experience only a few symptoms while others may experience many.The most common types of depression are:Depression is one of the most common mental disorders in the U.S. Current research suggests that depression is caused by a combination of risk factors including:Men often avoid addressing their feelings and, in many cases, friends and family members are the first to recognize that their loved one is depressed. It is important that friends and family support their loved one and encourage him to visit a doctor or mental health professional for an evaluation. A health professional can do an exam or lab tests to rule out other conditions that may have symptoms that are like those of depression. He or she also can tell if certain medications are affecting the depression.The doctor needs to get a complete history of symptoms, such as when they started, how long they have lasted, how bad they are, whether they have occurred before, and if so, how they were treated. It is important that the man seeking help be open and honest about any efforts at “self-medication” with alcohol, non-prescribed drugs, gambling, or high-risk activities. A complete history should include information about a family history of depression or other mental disorders.After a diagnosis, depression is usually treated with medications or psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. The increasingly-popular “collaborative care” approach combines physical and behavioral health care. Collaborative care involves a team of health care providers and managers, including a primary care doctor and specialists.Medications called antidepressants can work well to treat depression, but they can take several weeks to be effective. Often with medication, symptoms such as sleep, appetite, and concentration problems improve before mood lifts, so it is important to give medication a chance before deciding whether it is effective or not.Antidepressants can have side effects including:Most side effects lessen over time but it is important to talk with your doctor about any side effects that you may have. Starting antidepressant medication at a low dose and gradually increasing to a full therapeutic dose may help minimize adverse effects.It's important to know that although antidepressants can be safe and effective for many people, they may present serious risks to some, especially children, teens, and young adults. A "black box" warning—the most serious type of warning that a prescription drug can have—has been added to the labels of antidepressant medications to warn people that antidepressants may cause some young people to have suicidal thoughts or may increase the risk for suicide attempts. This is especially true for those who become agitated when they first start taking the medication and before it begins to work. Anyone taking antidepressants should be monitored closely, especially when they first start taking them.For most people, though, the risks of untreated depression far outweigh those of taking antidepressant medications under a doctor's supervision. Careful monitoring by a health professional will also minimize any potential risks.For reasons that are not well-understood, many people respond better to some antidepressants than to others. If a man does not respond to one medication, his doctor may suggest trying another. Sometimes, a medication may be only partially effective. In that case, another medication might be added to help make the antidepressant more effective.If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. Sometimes people taking antidepressants feel better and then stop taking the medication on their own, and the depression returns. When it is time to stop the medication, usually after a course of 6 to 12 months, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Some people who relapse back into depression after stopping an antidepressant benefit from staying on medication for additional months or years.Several types of psychotherapy or “talk therapy” can help treat depression. Some therapies are just as effective as medications for certain types of depression. Therapy helps by teaching new ways of thinking and behaving, and changing habits that may be contributing to the depression. Therapy can also help men understand and work through difficult situations or relationships that may be causing their depression or making it worse.Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), interpersonal therapy (IPT), and problem-solving therapy are examples of evidence-based talk therapy treatments for depression.Treatment for depression should be personalized. Some men, might try therapy first and add antidepressant medication later if it is needed. Others might start treatment with both medication and psychotherapy.Brain stimulation treatments can be considered when other approaches are unsuccessful or unwanted. One of the oldest treatments in psychiatry, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), is still used today. Generally, ECT is used in cases of severe depression that do not respond to multiple courses of antidepressants, or where there is a great need for rapid relief. For example, ECT might be considered if someone has strong suicidal thoughts or plans, or has stopped eating and drinking adequately. Advances in ECT make it safe and effective for most individuals, however, concern over possible memory loss and continuing stigma have limited its availability and acceptability in some places. ECT is generally considered the “gold standard” treatment of severe depression.Another type of brain stimulation using a magnetic stimulus is known as transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). TMS is an approved depression treatment and has been used for nearly a decade. TMS is a less powerful treatment than ECT, but a series of near-daily TMS sessions over several weeks is helpful for at least half the people who complete a full series. For more information about brain stimulation therapies, visit www.nimh.nih.gov (search: brain stimulation therapies)."I lost interest in the kids and doing things that we used to do…they'd ask their mother, ‘Why is Daddy not getting up and not wanting to do anything with us? Did we do something wrong?’ They didn't do anything to me. I just didn't want to do anything." —Rene, Police OfficerIt’s important to remember that a person with depression cannot simply "snap out of it." It is also important to know that he may not recognize his symptoms and may not want to get professional treatment.If you think someone has depression, you can support him by helping him find a doctor or mental health professional and then helping him make an appointment. Even men who have trouble recognizing that they are depressed may agree to seek help for physical symptoms, such as feeling tired or run down. They may be willing to talk with their regular health professional about a new difficulty they are having at work or losing interest in doing things they usually enjoy. Talking with a primary care provider may be a good first step toward learning about and treating possible depression.Other things that may help include:As you continue treatment, gradually you will start to feel better. Remember that if you are taking an antidepressant, it may take several weeks for it to start working. Try to do things that you used to enjoy before you had depression. Go easy on yourself.If you are unsure of where to go for help, ask your family doctor or health care provider. You can also find resources online including the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov/FindHelp, or check with your insurance carrier to find someone who participates in your plan. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency.Men with depression are at risk for suicide. If you or someone you know is in crisis, get help quickly.In many instances, a crisis can be avoided when friends or family members are involved in the treatment and can recognize crisis warning signs. Crisis warning signs are different for different people. One person may have more trouble sleeping and become more agitated. Another person may sleep more, stop eating, and focus on disturbing thoughts. Creating a plan that lists the loved one’s warning signs—those actions that usually occur before a crisis—and the health care provider’s contact information may help avoid a crisis."It starts slowly and the only person you're talking to is yourself. You're lost. It's dark, the pain is 24/7... you just want it to end... I'd drink and... I tried to numb my head... but you have to deal with it. It doesn't just go away." —Patrick, Retired Sergeant"It affects the way you think. It affects the way you feel. It affects the way you love... It's just a blanket that covers everything... and it's one that's just so asphyxiating. And at times you just say it's enough already. It just feels like enough." —Steve, WriterFor more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, visit https://www.mentalhealth.gov, or visit the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus  service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning and Communications Science Writing, Press and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free FAX: 301-443-4279 E-mail: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govNIMH publications are in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission. NIMH encourages you to reproduce them and use them in your efforts to improve public health. Citation of the National Institute of Mental Health as a source is appreciated.Using government materials inappropriately, however, can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to follow these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or at nimhinfo@nih.gov.National Institute of Mental Health U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. QF 17-5300 Revised January 2017 QR CodeThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuMen and women both experience depression but their symptoms can be very different. Because men who are depressed may appear to be angry or aggressive instead of sad, their families, friends, and even their doctors may not always recognize the anger or aggression as depression symptoms. In addition, men are less likely than women to recognize, talk about, and seek treatment for depression. Yet depression affects a large number of men.Everyone feels sad or irritable and has trouble sleeping once in a while. But these feelings and troubles usually pass after a couple of days. Depression is a common but serious mood disorder that may cause severe symptoms. Depression affects the ability to feel, think, and handle daily activities. Also known as major depressive disorder or clinical depression, a man must have symptoms for at least two weeks to be diagnosed with depression.Both men and women get depression but their willingness to talk about their feelings may be very different. This is one of the reasons that depression symptoms for men and women may be very different as well.For example, some men with depression hide their emotions and may seem to be angry, irritable, or aggressive while many women seem sad or express sadness. Men with depression may feel very tired and lose interest in work, family, or hobbies. They may be more likely to have difficulty sleeping than women who have depression. Sometimes mental health symptoms appear to be physical issues. For example, a racing heart, tightening chest, ongoing headaches, or digestive issues can be signs of a mental health problem. Many men are more likely to see their doctor about physical symptoms than emotional symptoms.Some men may turn to drugs or alcohol to try to cope with their emotional symptoms. Also, while women with depression are more likely to attempt suicide, men are more likely to die by suicide because they tend to use more lethal methods.Depression can affect any man at any age. With the right treatment, most men with depression can get better and gain back their interest in work, family, and hobbies."My daily routine was shot. I didn't have the energy to do anything. I got up because the dog had to be walked and my wife needed to go to work. The day would go by and I didn't know where it went. I wanted to get back to normal. I just wanted to be myself again." —Jimmy, FirefighterDifferent men have different symptoms, but some common depression symptoms include:Not every man who is depressed experiences every symptom. Some men experience only a few symptoms while others may experience many.The most common types of depression are:Depression is one of the most common mental disorders in the U.S. Current research suggests that depression is caused by a combination of risk factors including:Men often avoid addressing their feelings and, in many cases, friends and family members are the first to recognize that their loved one is depressed. It is important that friends and family support their loved one and encourage him to visit a doctor or mental health professional for an evaluation. A health professional can do an exam or lab tests to rule out other conditions that may have symptoms that are like those of depression. He or she also can tell if certain medications are affecting the depression.The doctor needs to get a complete history of symptoms, such as when they started, how long they have lasted, how bad they are, whether they have occurred before, and if so, how they were treated. It is important that the man seeking help be open and honest about any efforts at “self-medication” with alcohol, non-prescribed drugs, gambling, or high-risk activities. A complete history should include information about a family history of depression or other mental disorders.After a diagnosis, depression is usually treated with medications or psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. The increasingly-popular “collaborative care” approach combines physical and behavioral health care. Collaborative care involves a team of health care providers and managers, including a primary care doctor and specialists.Medications called antidepressants can work well to treat depression, but they can take several weeks to be effective. Often with medication, symptoms such as sleep, appetite, and concentration problems improve before mood lifts, so it is important to give medication a chance before deciding whether it is effective or not.Antidepressants can have side effects including:Most side effects lessen over time but it is important to talk with your doctor about any side effects that you may have. Starting antidepressant medication at a low dose and gradually increasing to a full therapeutic dose may help minimize adverse effects.It's important to know that although antidepressants can be safe and effective for many people, they may present serious risks to some, especially children, teens, and young adults. A "black box" warning—the most serious type of warning that a prescription drug can have—has been added to the labels of antidepressant medications to warn people that antidepressants may cause some young people to have suicidal thoughts or may increase the risk for suicide attempts. This is especially true for those who become agitated when they first start taking the medication and before it begins to work. Anyone taking antidepressants should be monitored closely, especially when they first start taking them.For most people, though, the risks of untreated depression far outweigh those of taking antidepressant medications under a doctor's supervision. Careful monitoring by a health professional will also minimize any potential risks.For reasons that are not well-understood, many people respond better to some antidepressants than to others. If a man does not respond to one medication, his doctor may suggest trying another. Sometimes, a medication may be only partially effective. In that case, another medication might be added to help make the antidepressant more effective.If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. Sometimes people taking antidepressants feel better and then stop taking the medication on their own, and the depression returns. When it is time to stop the medication, usually after a course of 6 to 12 months, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Some people who relapse back into depression after stopping an antidepressant benefit from staying on medication for additional months or years.Several types of psychotherapy or “talk therapy” can help treat depression. Some therapies are just as effective as medications for certain types of depression. Therapy helps by teaching new ways of thinking and behaving, and changing habits that may be contributing to the depression. Therapy can also help men understand and work through difficult situations or relationships that may be causing their depression or making it worse.Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), interpersonal therapy (IPT), and problem-solving therapy are examples of evidence-based talk therapy treatments for depression.Treatment for depression should be personalized. Some men, might try therapy first and add antidepressant medication later if it is needed. Others might start treatment with both medication and psychotherapy.Brain stimulation treatments can be considered when other approaches are unsuccessful or unwanted. One of the oldest treatments in psychiatry, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), is still used today. Generally, ECT is used in cases of severe depression that do not respond to multiple courses of antidepressants, or where there is a great need for rapid relief. For example, ECT might be considered if someone has strong suicidal thoughts or plans, or has stopped eating and drinking adequately. Advances in ECT make it safe and effective for most individuals, however, concern over possible memory loss and continuing stigma have limited its availability and acceptability in some places. ECT is generally considered the “gold standard” treatment of severe depression.Another type of brain stimulation using a magnetic stimulus is known as transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). TMS is an approved depression treatment and has been used for nearly a decade. TMS is a less powerful treatment than ECT, but a series of near-daily TMS sessions over several weeks is helpful for at least half the people who complete a full series. For more information about brain stimulation therapies, visit www.nimh.nih.gov (search: brain stimulation therapies)."I lost interest in the kids and doing things that we used to do…they'd ask their mother, ‘Why is Daddy not getting up and not wanting to do anything with us? Did we do something wrong?’ They didn't do anything to me. I just didn't want to do anything." —Rene, Police OfficerIt’s important to remember that a person with depression cannot simply "snap out of it." It is also important to know that he may not recognize his symptoms and may not want to get professional treatment.If you think someone has depression, you can support him by helping him find a doctor or mental health professional and then helping him make an appointment. Even men who have trouble recognizing that they are depressed may agree to seek help for physical symptoms, such as feeling tired or run down. They may be willing to talk with their regular health professional about a new difficulty they are having at work or losing interest in doing things they usually enjoy. Talking with a primary care provider may be a good first step toward learning about and treating possible depression.Other things that may help include:As you continue treatment, gradually you will start to feel better. Remember that if you are taking an antidepressant, it may take several weeks for it to start working. Try to do things that you used to enjoy before you had depression. Go easy on yourself.If you are unsure of where to go for help, ask your family doctor or health care provider. You can also find resources online including the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov/FindHelp, or check with your insurance carrier to find someone who participates in your plan. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency.Men with depression are at risk for suicide. If you or someone you know is in crisis, get help quickly.In many instances, a crisis can be avoided when friends or family members are involved in the treatment and can recognize crisis warning signs. Crisis warning signs are different for different people. One person may have more trouble sleeping and become more agitated. Another person may sleep more, stop eating, and focus on disturbing thoughts. Creating a plan that lists the loved one’s warning signs—those actions that usually occur before a crisis—and the health care provider’s contact information may help avoid a crisis."It starts slowly and the only person you're talking to is yourself. You're lost. It's dark, the pain is 24/7... you just want it to end... I'd drink and... I tried to numb my head... but you have to deal with it. It doesn't just go away." —Patrick, Retired Sergeant"It affects the way you think. It affects the way you feel. It affects the way you love... It's just a blanket that covers everything... and it's one that's just so asphyxiating. And at times you just say it's enough already. It just feels like enough." —Steve, WriterFor more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, visit https://www.mentalhealth.gov, or visit the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus  service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning and Communications Science Writing, Press and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free FAX: 301-443-4279 E-mail: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govNIMH publications are in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission. NIMH encourages you to reproduce them and use them in your efforts to improve public health. Citation of the National Institute of Mental Health as a source is appreciated.Using government materials inappropriately, however, can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to follow these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or at nimhinfo@nih.gov.National Institute of Mental Health U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. QF 17-5300 Revised January 2017 QR CodeThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuMen and women both experience depression but their symptoms can be very different. Because men who are depressed may appear to be angry or aggressive instead of sad, their families, friends, and even their doctors may not always recognize the anger or aggression as depression symptoms. In addition, men are less likely than women to recognize, talk about, and seek treatment for depression. Yet depression affects a large number of men.Everyone feels sad or irritable and has trouble sleeping once in a while. But these feelings and troubles usually pass after a couple of days. Depression is a common but serious mood disorder that may cause severe symptoms. Depression affects the ability to feel, think, and handle daily activities. Also known as major depressive disorder or clinical depression, a man must have symptoms for at least two weeks to be diagnosed with depression.Both men and women get depression but their willingness to talk about their feelings may be very different. This is one of the reasons that depression symptoms for men and women may be very different as well.For example, some men with depression hide their emotions and may seem to be angry, irritable, or aggressive while many women seem sad or express sadness. Men with depression may feel very tired and lose interest in work, family, or hobbies. They may be more likely to have difficulty sleeping than women who have depression. Sometimes mental health symptoms appear to be physical issues. For example, a racing heart, tightening chest, ongoing headaches, or digestive issues can be signs of a mental health problem. Many men are more likely to see their doctor about physical symptoms than emotional symptoms.Some men may turn to drugs or alcohol to try to cope with their emotional symptoms. Also, while women with depression are more likely to attempt suicide, men are more likely to die by suicide because they tend to use more lethal methods.Depression can affect any man at any age. With the right treatment, most men with depression can get better and gain back their interest in work, family, and hobbies."My daily routine was shot. I didn't have the energy to do anything. I got up because the dog had to be walked and my wife needed to go to work. The day would go by and I didn't know where it went. I wanted to get back to normal. I just wanted to be myself again." —Jimmy, FirefighterDifferent men have different symptoms, but some common depression symptoms include:Not every man who is depressed experiences every symptom. Some men experience only a few symptoms while others may experience many.The most common types of depression are:Depression is one of the most common mental disorders in the U.S. Current research suggests that depression is caused by a combination of risk factors including:Men often avoid addressing their feelings and, in many cases, friends and family members are the first to recognize that their loved one is depressed. It is important that friends and family support their loved one and encourage him to visit a doctor or mental health professional for an evaluation. A health professional can do an exam or lab tests to rule out other conditions that may have symptoms that are like those of depression. He or she also can tell if certain medications are affecting the depression.The doctor needs to get a complete history of symptoms, such as when they started, how long they have lasted, how bad they are, whether they have occurred before, and if so, how they were treated. It is important that the man seeking help be open and honest about any efforts at “self-medication” with alcohol, non-prescribed drugs, gambling, or high-risk activities. A complete history should include information about a family history of depression or other mental disorders.After a diagnosis, depression is usually treated with medications or psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. The increasingly-popular “collaborative care” approach combines physical and behavioral health care. Collaborative care involves a team of health care providers and managers, including a primary care doctor and specialists.Medications called antidepressants can work well to treat depression, but they can take several weeks to be effective. Often with medication, symptoms such as sleep, appetite, and concentration problems improve before mood lifts, so it is important to give medication a chance before deciding whether it is effective or not.Antidepressants can have side effects including:Most side effects lessen over time but it is important to talk with your doctor about any side effects that you may have. Starting antidepressant medication at a low dose and gradually increasing to a full therapeutic dose may help minimize adverse effects.It's important to know that although antidepressants can be safe and effective for many people, they may present serious risks to some, especially children, teens, and young adults. A "black box" warning—the most serious type of warning that a prescription drug can have—has been added to the labels of antidepressant medications to warn people that antidepressants may cause some young people to have suicidal thoughts or may increase the risk for suicide attempts. This is especially true for those who become agitated when they first start taking the medication and before it begins to work. Anyone taking antidepressants should be monitored closely, especially when they first start taking them.For most people, though, the risks of untreated depression far outweigh those of taking antidepressant medications under a doctor's supervision. Careful monitoring by a health professional will also minimize any potential risks.For reasons that are not well-understood, many people respond better to some antidepressants than to others. If a man does not respond to one medication, his doctor may suggest trying another. Sometimes, a medication may be only partially effective. In that case, another medication might be added to help make the antidepressant more effective.If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. Sometimes people taking antidepressants feel better and then stop taking the medication on their own, and the depression returns. When it is time to stop the medication, usually after a course of 6 to 12 months, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Some people who relapse back into depression after stopping an antidepressant benefit from staying on medication for additional months or years.Several types of psychotherapy or “talk therapy” can help treat depression. Some therapies are just as effective as medications for certain types of depression. Therapy helps by teaching new ways of thinking and behaving, and changing habits that may be contributing to the depression. Therapy can also help men understand and work through difficult situations or relationships that may be causing their depression or making it worse.Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), interpersonal therapy (IPT), and problem-solving therapy are examples of evidence-based talk therapy treatments for depression.Treatment for depression should be personalized. Some men, might try therapy first and add antidepressant medication later if it is needed. Others might start treatment with both medication and psychotherapy.Brain stimulation treatments can be considered when other approaches are unsuccessful or unwanted. One of the oldest treatments in psychiatry, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), is still used today. Generally, ECT is used in cases of severe depression that do not respond to multiple courses of antidepressants, or where there is a great need for rapid relief. For example, ECT might be considered if someone has strong suicidal thoughts or plans, or has stopped eating and drinking adequately. Advances in ECT make it safe and effective for most individuals, however, concern over possible memory loss and continuing stigma have limited its availability and acceptability in some places. ECT is generally considered the “gold standard” treatment of severe depression.Another type of brain stimulation using a magnetic stimulus is known as transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). TMS is an approved depression treatment and has been used for nearly a decade. TMS is a less powerful treatment than ECT, but a series of near-daily TMS sessions over several weeks is helpful for at least half the people who complete a full series. For more information about brain stimulation therapies, visit www.nimh.nih.gov (search: brain stimulation therapies)."I lost interest in the kids and doing things that we used to do…they'd ask their mother, ‘Why is Daddy not getting up and not wanting to do anything with us? Did we do something wrong?’ They didn't do anything to me. I just didn't want to do anything." —Rene, Police OfficerIt’s important to remember that a person with depression cannot simply "snap out of it." It is also important to know that he may not recognize his symptoms and may not want to get professional treatment.If you think someone has depression, you can support him by helping him find a doctor or mental health professional and then helping him make an appointment. Even men who have trouble recognizing that they are depressed may agree to seek help for physical symptoms, such as feeling tired or run down. They may be willing to talk with their regular health professional about a new difficulty they are having at work or losing interest in doing things they usually enjoy. Talking with a primary care provider may be a good first step toward learning about and treating possible depression.Other things that may help include:As you continue treatment, gradually you will start to feel better. Remember that if you are taking an antidepressant, it may take several weeks for it to start working. Try to do things that you used to enjoy before you had depression. Go easy on yourself.If you are unsure of where to go for help, ask your family doctor or health care provider. You can also find resources online including the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov/FindHelp, or check with your insurance carrier to find someone who participates in your plan. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency.Men with depression are at risk for suicide. If you or someone you know is in crisis, get help quickly.In many instances, a crisis can be avoided when friends or family members are involved in the treatment and can recognize crisis warning signs. Crisis warning signs are different for different people. One person may have more trouble sleeping and become more agitated. Another person may sleep more, stop eating, and focus on disturbing thoughts. Creating a plan that lists the loved one’s warning signs—those actions that usually occur before a crisis—and the health care provider’s contact information may help avoid a crisis."It starts slowly and the only person you're talking to is yourself. You're lost. It's dark, the pain is 24/7... you just want it to end... I'd drink and... I tried to numb my head... but you have to deal with it. It doesn't just go away." —Patrick, Retired Sergeant"It affects the way you think. It affects the way you feel. It affects the way you love... It's just a blanket that covers everything... and it's one that's just so asphyxiating. And at times you just say it's enough already. It just feels like enough." —Steve, WriterFor more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, visit https://www.mentalhealth.gov, or visit the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus  service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning and Communications Science Writing, Press and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free FAX: 301-443-4279 E-mail: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govNIMH publications are in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission. NIMH encourages you to reproduce them and use them in your efforts to improve public health. Citation of the National Institute of Mental Health as a source is appreciated.Using government materials inappropriately, however, can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to follow these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or at nimhinfo@nih.gov.National Institute of Mental Health U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. QF 17-5300 Revised January 2017 QR CodeThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuMen and women both experience depression but their symptoms can be very different. Because men who are depressed may appear to be angry or aggressive instead of sad, their families, friends, and even their doctors may not always recognize the anger or aggression as depression symptoms. In addition, men are less likely than women to recognize, talk about, and seek treatment for depression. Yet depression affects a large number of men.Everyone feels sad or irritable and has trouble sleeping once in a while. But these feelings and troubles usually pass after a couple of days. Depression is a common but serious mood disorder that may cause severe symptoms. Depression affects the ability to feel, think, and handle daily activities. Also known as major depressive disorder or clinical depression, a man must have symptoms for at least two weeks to be diagnosed with depression.Both men and women get depression but their willingness to talk about their feelings may be very different. This is one of the reasons that depression symptoms for men and women may be very different as well.For example, some men with depression hide their emotions and may seem to be angry, irritable, or aggressive while many women seem sad or express sadness. Men with depression may feel very tired and lose interest in work, family, or hobbies. They may be more likely to have difficulty sleeping than women who have depression. Sometimes mental health symptoms appear to be physical issues. For example, a racing heart, tightening chest, ongoing headaches, or digestive issues can be signs of a mental health problem. Many men are more likely to see their doctor about physical symptoms than emotional symptoms.Some men may turn to drugs or alcohol to try to cope with their emotional symptoms. Also, while women with depression are more likely to attempt suicide, men are more likely to die by suicide because they tend to use more lethal methods.Depression can affect any man at any age. With the right treatment, most men with depression can get better and gain back their interest in work, family, and hobbies."My daily routine was shot. I didn't have the energy to do anything. I got up because the dog had to be walked and my wife needed to go to work. The day would go by and I didn't know where it went. I wanted to get back to normal. I just wanted to be myself again." —Jimmy, FirefighterDifferent men have different symptoms, but some common depression symptoms include:Not every man who is depressed experiences every symptom. Some men experience only a few symptoms while others may experience many.The most common types of depression are:Depression is one of the most common mental disorders in the U.S. Current research suggests that depression is caused by a combination of risk factors including:Men often avoid addressing their feelings and, in many cases, friends and family members are the first to recognize that their loved one is depressed. It is important that friends and family support their loved one and encourage him to visit a doctor or mental health professional for an evaluation. A health professional can do an exam or lab tests to rule out other conditions that may have symptoms that are like those of depression. He or she also can tell if certain medications are affecting the depression.The doctor needs to get a complete history of symptoms, such as when they started, how long they have lasted, how bad they are, whether they have occurred before, and if so, how they were treated. It is important that the man seeking help be open and honest about any efforts at “self-medication” with alcohol, non-prescribed drugs, gambling, or high-risk activities. A complete history should include information about a family history of depression or other mental disorders.After a diagnosis, depression is usually treated with medications or psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. The increasingly-popular “collaborative care” approach combines physical and behavioral health care. Collaborative care involves a team of health care providers and managers, including a primary care doctor and specialists.Medications called antidepressants can work well to treat depression, but they can take several weeks to be effective. Often with medication, symptoms such as sleep, appetite, and concentration problems improve before mood lifts, so it is important to give medication a chance before deciding whether it is effective or not.Antidepressants can have side effects including:Most side effects lessen over time but it is important to talk with your doctor about any side effects that you may have. Starting antidepressant medication at a low dose and gradually increasing to a full therapeutic dose may help minimize adverse effects.It's important to know that although antidepressants can be safe and effective for many people, they may present serious risks to some, especially children, teens, and young adults. A "black box" warning—the most serious type of warning that a prescription drug can have—has been added to the labels of antidepressant medications to warn people that antidepressants may cause some young people to have suicidal thoughts or may increase the risk for suicide attempts. This is especially true for those who become agitated when they first start taking the medication and before it begins to work. Anyone taking antidepressants should be monitored closely, especially when they first start taking them.For most people, though, the risks of untreated depression far outweigh those of taking antidepressant medications under a doctor's supervision. Careful monitoring by a health professional will also minimize any potential risks.For reasons that are not well-understood, many people respond better to some antidepressants than to others. If a man does not respond to one medication, his doctor may suggest trying another. Sometimes, a medication may be only partially effective. In that case, another medication might be added to help make the antidepressant more effective.If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. Sometimes people taking antidepressants feel better and then stop taking the medication on their own, and the depression returns. When it is time to stop the medication, usually after a course of 6 to 12 months, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Some people who relapse back into depression after stopping an antidepressant benefit from staying on medication for additional months or years.Several types of psychotherapy or “talk therapy” can help treat depression. Some therapies are just as effective as medications for certain types of depression. Therapy helps by teaching new ways of thinking and behaving, and changing habits that may be contributing to the depression. Therapy can also help men understand and work through difficult situations or relationships that may be causing their depression or making it worse.Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), interpersonal therapy (IPT), and problem-solving therapy are examples of evidence-based talk therapy treatments for depression.Treatment for depression should be personalized. Some men, might try therapy first and add antidepressant medication later if it is needed. Others might start treatment with both medication and psychotherapy.Brain stimulation treatments can be considered when other approaches are unsuccessful or unwanted. One of the oldest treatments in psychiatry, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), is still used today. Generally, ECT is used in cases of severe depression that do not respond to multiple courses of antidepressants, or where there is a great need for rapid relief. For example, ECT might be considered if someone has strong suicidal thoughts or plans, or has stopped eating and drinking adequately. Advances in ECT make it safe and effective for most individuals, however, concern over possible memory loss and continuing stigma have limited its availability and acceptability in some places. ECT is generally considered the “gold standard” treatment of severe depression.Another type of brain stimulation using a magnetic stimulus is known as transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). TMS is an approved depression treatment and has been used for nearly a decade. TMS is a less powerful treatment than ECT, but a series of near-daily TMS sessions over several weeks is helpful for at least half the people who complete a full series. For more information about brain stimulation therapies, visit www.nimh.nih.gov (search: brain stimulation therapies)."I lost interest in the kids and doing things that we used to do…they'd ask their mother, ‘Why is Daddy not getting up and not wanting to do anything with us? Did we do something wrong?’ They didn't do anything to me. I just didn't want to do anything." —Rene, Police OfficerIt’s important to remember that a person with depression cannot simply "snap out of it." It is also important to know that he may not recognize his symptoms and may not want to get professional treatment.If you think someone has depression, you can support him by helping him find a doctor or mental health professional and then helping him make an appointment. Even men who have trouble recognizing that they are depressed may agree to seek help for physical symptoms, such as feeling tired or run down. They may be willing to talk with their regular health professional about a new difficulty they are having at work or losing interest in doing things they usually enjoy. Talking with a primary care provider may be a good first step toward learning about and treating possible depression.Other things that may help include:As you continue treatment, gradually you will start to feel better. Remember that if you are taking an antidepressant, it may take several weeks for it to start working. Try to do things that you used to enjoy before you had depression. Go easy on yourself.If you are unsure of where to go for help, ask your family doctor or health care provider. You can also find resources online including the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov/FindHelp, or check with your insurance carrier to find someone who participates in your plan. Hospital doctors can help in an emergency.Men with depression are at risk for suicide. If you or someone you know is in crisis, get help quickly.In many instances, a crisis can be avoided when friends or family members are involved in the treatment and can recognize crisis warning signs. Crisis warning signs are different for different people. One person may have more trouble sleeping and become more agitated. Another person may sleep more, stop eating, and focus on disturbing thoughts. Creating a plan that lists the loved one’s warning signs—those actions that usually occur before a crisis—and the health care provider’s contact information may help avoid a crisis."It starts slowly and the only person you're talking to is yourself. You're lost. It's dark, the pain is 24/7... you just want it to end... I'd drink and... I tried to numb my head... but you have to deal with it. It doesn't just go away." —Patrick, Retired Sergeant"It affects the way you think. It affects the way you feel. It affects the way you love... It's just a blanket that covers everything... and it's one that's just so asphyxiating. And at times you just say it's enough already. It just feels like enough." —Steve, WriterFor more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, visit https://www.mentalhealth.gov, or visit the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus  service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning and Communications Science Writing, Press and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free FAX: 301-443-4279 E-mail: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govNIMH publications are in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission. NIMH encourages you to reproduce them and use them in your efforts to improve public health. Citation of the National Institute of Mental Health as a source is appreciated.Using government materials inappropriately, however, can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to follow these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or at nimhinfo@nih.gov.National Institute of Mental Health U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. QF 17-5300 Revised January 2017 QR CodeThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuMedications can play a role in treating several mental disorders and conditions. Treatment may also include psychotherapy (also called “talk therapy”) and brain stimulation therapies (less common). In some cases, psychotherapy alone may be the best treatment option. Choosing the right treatment plan should be based on a person's individual needs and medical situation, and under a mental health professional’s care.The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), a Federal research agency, does not provide medical advice or referrals. Resources that may help you find treatment services in your area are listed on our Help for Mental Illnesses web page.NIMH also does not endorse or recommend any particular drug, herb, or supplement. Results from NIMH-supported clinical research trials (What are Clinical Research Trials?) that examine the effectiveness of treatments, including medications, are reported in the medical literature. This health topic webpage is intended to provide basic information about mental health medications. It is not a complete source for all medications available and should not be used as a guide for making medical decisions.Information about medications changes frequently. Check the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website for the latest warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications. Brand names are not referenced on this page, but you can search by brand name on MedlinePlus Drugs, Herbs and Supplements Drugs website. The MedlinePlus website also provides additional information about each medication, including side effects and FDA warnings.If you are prescribed a medication, be sure that you:Antidepressants are medications commonly used to treat depression. Antidepressants are also used for other health conditions, such as anxiety, pain and insomnia. Although antidepressants are not FDA-approved specifically to treat ADHD, antidepressants are sometimes used to treat ADHD in adults.The most popular types of antidepressants are called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Examples of SSRIs include:Other types of antidepressants are serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs). SNRIs are similar to SSRIs and include  venlafaxine and duloxetine.Another antidepressant that is commonly used is bupropion. Bupropion is a third type of antidepressant which works differently than either SSRIs or SNRIs.  Bupropion is also used to treat seasonal affective disorder and to help people stop smoking.SSRIs, SNRIs, and bupropion are popular because they do not cause as many side effects as older classes of antidepressants, and seem to help a broader group of depressive and anxiety disorders. Older antidepressant medications include tricyclics, tetracyclics, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). For some people, tricyclics, tetracyclics, or MAOIs may be the best medications.According to a research review by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, all antidepressant medications work about as well as each other to improve symptoms of depression and to keep depression symptoms from coming back. For reasons not yet well understood, some people respond better to some antidepressant medications than to others.Therefore, it is important to know that some people may not feel better with the first medicine they try and may need to try several medicines to find the one that works for them. Others may find that a medicine helped for a while, but their symptoms came back. It is important to carefully follow your doctor’s directions for taking your medicine at an adequate dose and over an extended period of time (often 4 to 6 weeks) for it to work.Once a person begins taking antidepressants, it is important to not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. Sometimes people taking antidepressants feel better and stop taking the medication too soon, and the depression may return. When it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help the person slowly and safely decrease the dose. It's important to give the body time to adjust to the change. People don't get addicted (or "hooked") on these medications, but stopping them abruptly may also cause withdrawal symptomsSome antidepressants may cause more side effects than others. You may need to try several different antidepressant medications before finding the one that improves your symptoms and that causes side effects that you can manage.The most common side effects listed by the FDA include:Call your doctor right away if you have any of the following symptoms, especially if they are new, worsening, or worry you(U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2011):Combining the newer SSRI or SNRI antidepressants with one of the commonly-used "triptan" medications used to treat migraine headaches could cause a life-threatening illness called "serotonin syndrome." A person with serotonin syndrome may be agitated, have hallucinations (see or hear things that are not real), have a high temperature, or have unusual blood pressure changes. Serotonin syndrome is usually associated with the older antidepressants called MAOIs, but it can happen with the newer antidepressants as well, if they are mixed with the wrong medications. For more information, please see the FDA Medication Guide on Antidepressant MedicinesAntidepressants may cause other side effects that were not included in this list. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of antidepressant medicines, please contact the FDA MedWatch program using the contact information at the bottom of this page. For more information about the risks and side effects for each medication, please see Drugs@FDA.Anti-anxiety medications help reduce the symptoms of anxiety, such as panic attacks, or extreme fear and worry. The most common anti-anxiety medications are called benzodiazepines. Benzodiazepines can treat generalized anxiety disorder. In the case of panic disorder or social phobia (social anxiety disorder), benzodiazepines are usually second-line treatments, behind SSRIs or other antidepressants.Benzodiazepines used to treat anxiety disorders include:Buspirone (which is unrelated to the benzodiazepines) is sometimes used for the long-term treatment of chronic anxiety. In contrast to the benzodiazepines, buspirone must be taken every day for a few weeks to reach its full effect. It is not useful on an “as-needed” basis.Anti-anxiety medications such as benzodiazepines are effective in relieving anxiety and take effect more quickly than the antidepressant medications (or buspirone) often prescribed for anxiety. However, people can build up a tolerance to benzodiazepines if they are taken over a long period of time and may need higher and higher doses to get the same effect. Some people may even become dependent on them. To avoid these problems, doctors usually prescribe benzodiazepines for short periods, a practice that is especially helpful for older adults (read the NIMH article: Despite Risks, Benzodiazepine Use Highest in Older People), people who have substance abuse problems and people who become dependent on medication easily. If people suddenly stop taking benzodiazepines, they may have withdrawal symptoms or their anxiety may return. Therefore, benzodiazepines should be tapered off slowly.Like other medications, anti-anxiety medications may cause side effects. Some of these side effects and risks are serious. The most common side effects for benzodiazepines are drowsiness and dizziness. Other possible side effects include:Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:If you experience any of the symptoms below, call your doctor immediately:Common side effects of beta-blockers include:Beta-blockers generally are not recommended for people with asthma or diabetes because they may worsen symptoms related to both.Possible side effects from buspirone include:Anti-anxiety medications may cause other side effects that are not included in the lists above. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of these medicines, please contact the FDA MedWatch program using the contact information at the bottom of this page. For more information about the risks and side effects for each medication, please see Drugs@FDA.As the name suggests, stimulants increase alertness, attention, and energy, as well as elevate blood pressure, heart rate, and respiration (National Institute on Drug Abuse, 2014). Stimulant medications are often prescribed to treat children, adolescents, or adults diagnosed with ADHD.Stimulants used to treat ADHD include:Note: In 2002, the FDA approved the non-stimulant medication atomoxetine for use as a treatment for ADHD. Two other non-stimulant antihypertensive medications, clonidine and guanfacine, are also approved for treatment of ADHD in children and adolescents. One of these non-stimulant medications is often tried first in a young person with ADHD, and if response is insufficient, then a stimulant is prescribed.Stimulants are also prescribed to treat other health conditions, including narcolepsy, and occasionally depression (especially in older or chronically medically ill people and in those who have not responded to other treatments).Prescription stimulants have a calming and “focusing” effect on individuals with ADHD. Stimulant medications are safe when given under a doctor's supervision. Some children taking them may feel slightly different or "funny."Some parents worry that stimulant medications may lead to drug abuse or dependence, but there is little evidence of this when they are used properly as prescribed. Additionally, research shows that teens with ADHD who took stimulant medications were less likely to abuse drugs than those who did not take stimulant medications.Stimulants may cause side effects. Most side effects are minor and disappear when dosage levels are lowered. The most common side effects include:Less common side effects include:Stimulants may cause other side effects that are not included in the list above. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of stimulants, please contact the FDA MedWatch program using the contact information at the bottom of this page. For more information about the risks and side effects for each medication, please see Drugs@FDA.Antipsychotic medicines are primarily used to manage psychosis. The word “psychosis” is used to describe conditions that affect the mind, and in which there has been some loss of contact with reality, often including delusions (false, fixed beliefs) or hallucinations (hearing or seeing things that are not really there). It can be a symptom of a physical condition such as drug abuse or a mental disorder such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or very severe depression (also known as “psychotic depression”).Antipsychotic medications are often used in combination with other medications to treat delirium, dementia, and mental health conditions, including:Antipsychotic medicines do not cure these conditions. They are used to help relieve symptoms and improve quality of life.Older or first-generation antipsychotic medications are also called conventional "typical" antipsychotics or “neuroleptics”. Some of the common typical antipsychotics include:Newer or second generation medications are also called "atypical" antipsychotics. Some of the common atypical antipsychotics include:According to a 2013 research review by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, typical and atypical antipsychotics both work to treat symptoms of schizophrenia and the manic phase of bipolar disorder.Several atypical antipsychotics have a “broader spectrum” of action than the older medications, and are used for treating bipolar depression or depression that has not responded to an antidepressant medication alone.To find additional antipsychotics and other medications used to manage psychoses and current warnings and advisories, please visit the FDA website.Certain symptoms, such as feeling agitated and having hallucinations, usually go away within days of starting an antipsychotic medication. Symptoms like delusions usually go away within a few weeks, but the full effects of the medication may not be seen for up to six weeks. Every patient responds differently, so it may take several trials of different antipsychotic medications to find the one that works best.Some people may have a relapse—meaning their symptoms come back or get worse. Usually relapses happen when people stop taking their medication, or when they only take it sometimes. Some people stop taking the medication because they feel better or they may feel that they don't need it anymore, but no one should stop taking an antipsychotic medication without talking to his or her doctor.When a doctor says it is okay to stop taking a medication, it should be gradually tapered off— never stopped suddenly. Many people must stay on an antipsychotic continuously for months or years in order to stay well; treatment should be personalized for each individual.What are the possible side effects of antipsychotics?Antipsychotics have many side effects (or adverse events) and risks. The FDA lists the following side effects of antipsychotic medicines:A person taking an atypical antipsychotic medication should have his or her weight, glucose levels, and lipid levels monitored regularly by a doctor.Typical antipsychotic medications can also cause additional side effects related to physical movement, such as:Long-term use of typical antipsychotic medications may lead to a condition called tardive dyskinesia (TD). TD causes muscle movements, commonly around the mouth, that a person can't control. TD can range from mild to severe, and in some people, the problem cannot be cured. Sometimes people with TD recover partially or fully after they stop taking typical antipsychotic medication. People who think that they might have TD should check with their doctor before stopping their medication. TD rarely occurs while taking atypical antipsychotics.Antipsychotics may cause other side effects that are not included in this list above. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of these medicines, please contact the FDA MedWatch program. For more information about the risks and side effects for antipsychotic medications, please visit Drugs@FDA.Mood stabilizers are used primarily to treat bipolar disorder, mood swings associated with other mental disorders, and in some cases, to augment the effect of other medications used to treat depression. Lithium, which is aneffective mood stabilizer, is approved for the treatment of mania and the maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder. A number of cohort studies describe anti-suicide benefits of lithium for individuals on long-term maintenance. Mood stabilizers work by decreasing abnormal activity in the brain and are also sometimes used to treat:Anticonvulsant medications are also used as mood stabilizers. They were originally developed to treat seizures, but they were found to help control unstable moods as well. One anticonvulsant commonly used as a mood stabilizer is valproic acid (also called divalproex sodium). For some people, especially those with “mixed” symptoms of mania and depression or those with rapid-cycling bipolar disorder, valproic acid may work better than lithium. Other anticonvulsants used as mood stabilizers include:What are the possible side effects of mood stabilizers?Mood stabilizers can cause several side effects, and some of them may become serious, especially at excessively high blood levels. These side effects include:If a person with bipolar disorder is being treated with lithium, he or she should visit the doctor regularly to check the lithium levels his or her blood, and make sure the kidneys and the thyroid are working normally.Lithium is eliminated from the body through the kidney, so the dose may need to be lowered in older people with reduced kidney function. Also, loss of water from the body, such as through sweating or diarrhea, can cause the lithium level to rise, requiring a temporary lowering of the daily dose. Although kidney functions are checked periodically during lithium treatment, actual damage of the kidney is uncommon in people whose blood levels of lithium have stayed within the therapeutic range.Mood stabilizers may cause other side effects that are not included in this list. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of these medicines, please contact the FDA MedWatch program using the contact information at the bottom of this page. For more information about the risks and side effects for each individual medication, please see Drugs@FDA.For more information on the side effects of Carbamazepine, Lamotrigine, and Oxcarbazepine, please visit MedlinePlus Drugs, Herbs and Supplements.Some possible side effects linked anticonvulsants (such as valproic acid) include:These medications may also:Medications for common adult health problems, such as diabetes, high blood pressure, anxiety, and depression may interact badly with anticonvulsants. In this case, a doctor can offer other medication options.For more information about the risks and side effects for each medication, please see Drugs@FDA.All types of people take psychiatric medications, but some groups have special needs, including:Many medications used to treat children and adolescents with mental illness are safe and effective. However, some medications have not been studied or approved for use with children or adolescents.Still, a doctor can give a young person an FDA-approved medication on an "off-label" basis. This means that the doctor prescribes the medication to help the patient even though the medicine is not approved for the specific mental disorder that is being treated or for use by patients under a certain age. Remember:In addition to medications, other treatments for children and adolescents should be considered, either to be tried first, with medication added later if necessary, or to be provided along with medication. Psychotherapy, family therapy, educational courses, and behavior management techniques can help everyone involved cope with disorders that affect a child’s mental health. Read more about child and adolescent mental health research.People over 65 have to be careful when taking medications, especially when they’re taking many different drugs. Older adults have a higher risk for experiencing bad drug interactions, missing doses, or overdosing.Older adults also tend to be more sensitive to medications. Even healthy older people react to medications differently than younger people because older people's bodies process and eliminate medications more slowly. Therefore, lower or less frequent doses may be needed for older adults. Before starting a medication, older people and their family members should talk carefully with a physician about whether a medication can affect alertness, memory, or coordination, and how to help ensure that prescribed medications do not increase the risk of falls.Sometimes memory problems affect older people who take medications for mental disorders. An older adult may forget his or her regular dose and take too much or not enough. A good way to keep track of medicine is to use a seven-day pill box, which can be bought at any pharmacy. At the beginning of each week, older adults and their caregivers fill the box so that it is easy to remember what medicine to take. Many pharmacies also have pill boxes with sections for medications that must be taken more than once a day.For more information and practical tips to help older people take their medicines safely, please see National Institute on Aging’s Safe Use of Medicines booklet and Taking Medicines on NIHSeniorHealth.gov.The research on the use of psychiatric medications during pregnancy is limited. The risks are different depending on which medication is taken, and at what point during the pregnancy the medication is taken. Decisions on treatments for all conditions during pregnancy should be based on each woman's needs and circumstances, and based on a careful weighing of the likely benefits and risks of all available options, including psychotherapy (or “watchful waiting” during part or all of the pregnancy), medication, or a combination of the two. While no medication is considered perfectly safe for all women at all stages of pregnancy, this must be balanced for each woman against the fact that untreated serious mental disorders themselves can pose a risk to a pregnant woman and her developing fetus. Medications should be selected based on available scientific research, and they should be taken at the lowest possible dose. Pregnant women should have a medical professional who will watch them closely throughout their pregnancy and after delivery.Most women should avoid certain medications during pregnancy. For example:Antidepressants, especially SSRIs, are considered to be safe during pregnancy. However, antidepressant medications do cross the placental barrier and may reach the fetus. Birth defects or other problems are possible, but they are very rare. The effects of antidepressants on childhood development remain under study.Studies have also found that fetuses exposed to SSRIs during the third trimester may be born with "withdrawal" symptoms such as breathing problems, jitteriness, irritability, trouble feeding, or hypoglycemia (low blood sugar). Most studies have found that these symptoms in babies are generally mild and short-lived, and no deaths have been reported. Risks from the use of antidepressants need to be balanced with the risks of stopping medication; if a mother is too depressed to care for herself and her child, both may be at risk for problems.In 2004, the FDA issued a warning against the use of certain antidepressants in the late third trimester. The warning said that doctors may want to gradually taper pregnant women off antidepressants in the third trimester so that the baby is not affected. After a woman delivers, she should consult with her doctor to decide whether to return to a full dose during the period when she is most vulnerable to postpartum depression.After the baby is born, women and their doctors should watch for postpartum depression, especially if a mother stopped taking her medication during pregnancy. In addition, women who nurse while taking psychiatric medications should know that a small amount of the medication passes into the breast milk. However, the medication may or may not affect the baby depending s on the medication and when it is taken. Women taking psychiatric medications and who intend to breastfeed should discuss the potential risks and benefits with their doctors.The FDA is responsible for protecting the public health by ensuring the safety, efficacy and security of drugs (medications), biological products, medical devices, our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, and products that emit radiation.FDA is also responsible for advancing public health by helping to speed innovations that make medicines more effective, safer, and more affordable and by helping the public get accurate science-based information they need to use medicines and foods to maintain and improve their health.Visit FDA’s MedWatch to voluntarily report a serious adverse effect, product quality problem, product use error or product failure that you suspect is associated with the use of an FDA-regulated drug, biologic, medical device, dietary supplement or cosmetic. You can also report suspected counterfeit medical products to the FDA through MedWatch. You can also use the contact information provided below:1-800-332-10881-800-FDA-0178 FaxReport a Serious Problem: MedWatch OnlineRegular Mail: Use postage-paid FDA Form 3500Mail to: MedWatch, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857FDAs MedWatch program offers several ways to help you stay informed about the medical products are prescribed, administered, or dispensed every day. Get safety alerts delivered to your inbox. To subscribe, join the MedWatch email list. Learn more about the MedWatch E-list. You can also follow MedWatch on Twitter by following @FDAMedWatch.Last Revised: October 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuMedications can play a role in treating several mental disorders and conditions. Treatment may also include psychotherapy (also called “talk therapy”) and brain stimulation therapies (less common). In some cases, psychotherapy alone may be the best treatment option. Choosing the right treatment plan should be based on a person's individual needs and medical situation, and under a mental health professional’s care.The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), a Federal research agency, does not provide medical advice or referrals. Resources that may help you find treatment services in your area are listed on our Help for Mental Illnesses web page.NIMH also does not endorse or recommend any particular drug, herb, or supplement. Results from NIMH-supported clinical research trials (What are Clinical Research Trials?) that examine the effectiveness of treatments, including medications, are reported in the medical literature. This health topic webpage is intended to provide basic information about mental health medications. It is not a complete source for all medications available and should not be used as a guide for making medical decisions.Information about medications changes frequently. Check the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website for the latest warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications. Brand names are not referenced on this page, but you can search by brand name on MedlinePlus Drugs, Herbs and Supplements Drugs website. The MedlinePlus website also provides additional information about each medication, including side effects and FDA warnings.If you are prescribed a medication, be sure that you:Antidepressants are medications commonly used to treat depression. Antidepressants are also used for other health conditions, such as anxiety, pain and insomnia. Although antidepressants are not FDA-approved specifically to treat ADHD, antidepressants are sometimes used to treat ADHD in adults.The most popular types of antidepressants are called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Examples of SSRIs include:Other types of antidepressants are serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs). SNRIs are similar to SSRIs and include  venlafaxine and duloxetine.Another antidepressant that is commonly used is bupropion. Bupropion is a third type of antidepressant which works differently than either SSRIs or SNRIs.  Bupropion is also used to treat seasonal affective disorder and to help people stop smoking.SSRIs, SNRIs, and bupropion are popular because they do not cause as many side effects as older classes of antidepressants, and seem to help a broader group of depressive and anxiety disorders. Older antidepressant medications include tricyclics, tetracyclics, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). For some people, tricyclics, tetracyclics, or MAOIs may be the best medications.According to a research review by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, all antidepressant medications work about as well as each other to improve symptoms of depression and to keep depression symptoms from coming back. For reasons not yet well understood, some people respond better to some antidepressant medications than to others.Therefore, it is important to know that some people may not feel better with the first medicine they try and may need to try several medicines to find the one that works for them. Others may find that a medicine helped for a while, but their symptoms came back. It is important to carefully follow your doctor’s directions for taking your medicine at an adequate dose and over an extended period of time (often 4 to 6 weeks) for it to work.Once a person begins taking antidepressants, it is important to not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. Sometimes people taking antidepressants feel better and stop taking the medication too soon, and the depression may return. When it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help the person slowly and safely decrease the dose. It's important to give the body time to adjust to the change. People don't get addicted (or "hooked") on these medications, but stopping them abruptly may also cause withdrawal symptomsSome antidepressants may cause more side effects than others. You may need to try several different antidepressant medications before finding the one that improves your symptoms and that causes side effects that you can manage.The most common side effects listed by the FDA include:Call your doctor right away if you have any of the following symptoms, especially if they are new, worsening, or worry you(U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2011):Combining the newer SSRI or SNRI antidepressants with one of the commonly-used "triptan" medications used to treat migraine headaches could cause a life-threatening illness called "serotonin syndrome." A person with serotonin syndrome may be agitated, have hallucinations (see or hear things that are not real), have a high temperature, or have unusual blood pressure changes. Serotonin syndrome is usually associated with the older antidepressants called MAOIs, but it can happen with the newer antidepressants as well, if they are mixed with the wrong medications. For more information, please see the FDA Medication Guide on Antidepressant MedicinesAntidepressants may cause other side effects that were not included in this list. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of antidepressant medicines, please contact the FDA MedWatch program using the contact information at the bottom of this page. For more information about the risks and side effects for each medication, please see Drugs@FDA.Anti-anxiety medications help reduce the symptoms of anxiety, such as panic attacks, or extreme fear and worry. The most common anti-anxiety medications are called benzodiazepines. Benzodiazepines can treat generalized anxiety disorder. In the case of panic disorder or social phobia (social anxiety disorder), benzodiazepines are usually second-line treatments, behind SSRIs or other antidepressants.Benzodiazepines used to treat anxiety disorders include:Buspirone (which is unrelated to the benzodiazepines) is sometimes used for the long-term treatment of chronic anxiety. In contrast to the benzodiazepines, buspirone must be taken every day for a few weeks to reach its full effect. It is not useful on an “as-needed” basis.Anti-anxiety medications such as benzodiazepines are effective in relieving anxiety and take effect more quickly than the antidepressant medications (or buspirone) often prescribed for anxiety. However, people can build up a tolerance to benzodiazepines if they are taken over a long period of time and may need higher and higher doses to get the same effect. Some people may even become dependent on them. To avoid these problems, doctors usually prescribe benzodiazepines for short periods, a practice that is especially helpful for older adults (read the NIMH article: Despite Risks, Benzodiazepine Use Highest in Older People), people who have substance abuse problems and people who become dependent on medication easily. If people suddenly stop taking benzodiazepines, they may have withdrawal symptoms or their anxiety may return. Therefore, benzodiazepines should be tapered off slowly.Like other medications, anti-anxiety medications may cause side effects. Some of these side effects and risks are serious. The most common side effects for benzodiazepines are drowsiness and dizziness. Other possible side effects include:Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:If you experience any of the symptoms below, call your doctor immediately:Common side effects of beta-blockers include:Beta-blockers generally are not recommended for people with asthma or diabetes because they may worsen symptoms related to both.Possible side effects from buspirone include:Anti-anxiety medications may cause other side effects that are not included in the lists above. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of these medicines, please contact the FDA MedWatch program using the contact information at the bottom of this page. For more information about the risks and side effects for each medication, please see Drugs@FDA.As the name suggests, stimulants increase alertness, attention, and energy, as well as elevate blood pressure, heart rate, and respiration (National Institute on Drug Abuse, 2014). Stimulant medications are often prescribed to treat children, adolescents, or adults diagnosed with ADHD.Stimulants used to treat ADHD include:Note: In 2002, the FDA approved the non-stimulant medication atomoxetine for use as a treatment for ADHD. Two other non-stimulant antihypertensive medications, clonidine and guanfacine, are also approved for treatment of ADHD in children and adolescents. One of these non-stimulant medications is often tried first in a young person with ADHD, and if response is insufficient, then a stimulant is prescribed.Stimulants are also prescribed to treat other health conditions, including narcolepsy, and occasionally depression (especially in older or chronically medically ill people and in those who have not responded to other treatments).Prescription stimulants have a calming and “focusing” effect on individuals with ADHD. Stimulant medications are safe when given under a doctor's supervision. Some children taking them may feel slightly different or "funny."Some parents worry that stimulant medications may lead to drug abuse or dependence, but there is little evidence of this when they are used properly as prescribed. Additionally, research shows that teens with ADHD who took stimulant medications were less likely to abuse drugs than those who did not take stimulant medications.Stimulants may cause side effects. Most side effects are minor and disappear when dosage levels are lowered. The most common side effects include:Less common side effects include:Stimulants may cause other side effects that are not included in the list above. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of stimulants, please contact the FDA MedWatch program using the contact information at the bottom of this page. For more information about the risks and side effects for each medication, please see Drugs@FDA.Antipsychotic medicines are primarily used to manage psychosis. The word “psychosis” is used to describe conditions that affect the mind, and in which there has been some loss of contact with reality, often including delusions (false, fixed beliefs) or hallucinations (hearing or seeing things that are not really there). It can be a symptom of a physical condition such as drug abuse or a mental disorder such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or very severe depression (also known as “psychotic depression”).Antipsychotic medications are often used in combination with other medications to treat delirium, dementia, and mental health conditions, including:Antipsychotic medicines do not cure these conditions. They are used to help relieve symptoms and improve quality of life.Older or first-generation antipsychotic medications are also called conventional "typical" antipsychotics or “neuroleptics”. Some of the common typical antipsychotics include:Newer or second generation medications are also called "atypical" antipsychotics. Some of the common atypical antipsychotics include:According to a 2013 research review by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, typical and atypical antipsychotics both work to treat symptoms of schizophrenia and the manic phase of bipolar disorder.Several atypical antipsychotics have a “broader spectrum” of action than the older medications, and are used for treating bipolar depression or depression that has not responded to an antidepressant medication alone.To find additional antipsychotics and other medications used to manage psychoses and current warnings and advisories, please visit the FDA website.Certain symptoms, such as feeling agitated and having hallucinations, usually go away within days of starting an antipsychotic medication. Symptoms like delusions usually go away within a few weeks, but the full effects of the medication may not be seen for up to six weeks. Every patient responds differently, so it may take several trials of different antipsychotic medications to find the one that works best.Some people may have a relapse—meaning their symptoms come back or get worse. Usually relapses happen when people stop taking their medication, or when they only take it sometimes. Some people stop taking the medication because they feel better or they may feel that they don't need it anymore, but no one should stop taking an antipsychotic medication without talking to his or her doctor.When a doctor says it is okay to stop taking a medication, it should be gradually tapered off— never stopped suddenly. Many people must stay on an antipsychotic continuously for months or years in order to stay well; treatment should be personalized for each individual.What are the possible side effects of antipsychotics?Antipsychotics have many side effects (or adverse events) and risks. The FDA lists the following side effects of antipsychotic medicines:A person taking an atypical antipsychotic medication should have his or her weight, glucose levels, and lipid levels monitored regularly by a doctor.Typical antipsychotic medications can also cause additional side effects related to physical movement, such as:Long-term use of typical antipsychotic medications may lead to a condition called tardive dyskinesia (TD). TD causes muscle movements, commonly around the mouth, that a person can't control. TD can range from mild to severe, and in some people, the problem cannot be cured. Sometimes people with TD recover partially or fully after they stop taking typical antipsychotic medication. People who think that they might have TD should check with their doctor before stopping their medication. TD rarely occurs while taking atypical antipsychotics.Antipsychotics may cause other side effects that are not included in this list above. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of these medicines, please contact the FDA MedWatch program. For more information about the risks and side effects for antipsychotic medications, please visit Drugs@FDA.Mood stabilizers are used primarily to treat bipolar disorder, mood swings associated with other mental disorders, and in some cases, to augment the effect of other medications used to treat depression. Lithium, which is aneffective mood stabilizer, is approved for the treatment of mania and the maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder. A number of cohort studies describe anti-suicide benefits of lithium for individuals on long-term maintenance. Mood stabilizers work by decreasing abnormal activity in the brain and are also sometimes used to treat:Anticonvulsant medications are also used as mood stabilizers. They were originally developed to treat seizures, but they were found to help control unstable moods as well. One anticonvulsant commonly used as a mood stabilizer is valproic acid (also called divalproex sodium). For some people, especially those with “mixed” symptoms of mania and depression or those with rapid-cycling bipolar disorder, valproic acid may work better than lithium. Other anticonvulsants used as mood stabilizers include:What are the possible side effects of mood stabilizers?Mood stabilizers can cause several side effects, and some of them may become serious, especially at excessively high blood levels. These side effects include:If a person with bipolar disorder is being treated with lithium, he or she should visit the doctor regularly to check the lithium levels his or her blood, and make sure the kidneys and the thyroid are working normally.Lithium is eliminated from the body through the kidney, so the dose may need to be lowered in older people with reduced kidney function. Also, loss of water from the body, such as through sweating or diarrhea, can cause the lithium level to rise, requiring a temporary lowering of the daily dose. Although kidney functions are checked periodically during lithium treatment, actual damage of the kidney is uncommon in people whose blood levels of lithium have stayed within the therapeutic range.Mood stabilizers may cause other side effects that are not included in this list. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of these medicines, please contact the FDA MedWatch program using the contact information at the bottom of this page. For more information about the risks and side effects for each individual medication, please see Drugs@FDA.For more information on the side effects of Carbamazepine, Lamotrigine, and Oxcarbazepine, please visit MedlinePlus Drugs, Herbs and Supplements.Some possible side effects linked anticonvulsants (such as valproic acid) include:These medications may also:Medications for common adult health problems, such as diabetes, high blood pressure, anxiety, and depression may interact badly with anticonvulsants. In this case, a doctor can offer other medication options.For more information about the risks and side effects for each medication, please see Drugs@FDA.All types of people take psychiatric medications, but some groups have special needs, including:Many medications used to treat children and adolescents with mental illness are safe and effective. However, some medications have not been studied or approved for use with children or adolescents.Still, a doctor can give a young person an FDA-approved medication on an "off-label" basis. This means that the doctor prescribes the medication to help the patient even though the medicine is not approved for the specific mental disorder that is being treated or for use by patients under a certain age. Remember:In addition to medications, other treatments for children and adolescents should be considered, either to be tried first, with medication added later if necessary, or to be provided along with medication. Psychotherapy, family therapy, educational courses, and behavior management techniques can help everyone involved cope with disorders that affect a child’s mental health. Read more about child and adolescent mental health research.People over 65 have to be careful when taking medications, especially when they’re taking many different drugs. Older adults have a higher risk for experiencing bad drug interactions, missing doses, or overdosing.Older adults also tend to be more sensitive to medications. Even healthy older people react to medications differently than younger people because older people's bodies process and eliminate medications more slowly. Therefore, lower or less frequent doses may be needed for older adults. Before starting a medication, older people and their family members should talk carefully with a physician about whether a medication can affect alertness, memory, or coordination, and how to help ensure that prescribed medications do not increase the risk of falls.Sometimes memory problems affect older people who take medications for mental disorders. An older adult may forget his or her regular dose and take too much or not enough. A good way to keep track of medicine is to use a seven-day pill box, which can be bought at any pharmacy. At the beginning of each week, older adults and their caregivers fill the box so that it is easy to remember what medicine to take. Many pharmacies also have pill boxes with sections for medications that must be taken more than once a day.For more information and practical tips to help older people take their medicines safely, please see National Institute on Aging’s Safe Use of Medicines booklet and Taking Medicines on NIHSeniorHealth.gov.The research on the use of psychiatric medications during pregnancy is limited. The risks are different depending on which medication is taken, and at what point during the pregnancy the medication is taken. Decisions on treatments for all conditions during pregnancy should be based on each woman's needs and circumstances, and based on a careful weighing of the likely benefits and risks of all available options, including psychotherapy (or “watchful waiting” during part or all of the pregnancy), medication, or a combination of the two. While no medication is considered perfectly safe for all women at all stages of pregnancy, this must be balanced for each woman against the fact that untreated serious mental disorders themselves can pose a risk to a pregnant woman and her developing fetus. Medications should be selected based on available scientific research, and they should be taken at the lowest possible dose. Pregnant women should have a medical professional who will watch them closely throughout their pregnancy and after delivery.Most women should avoid certain medications during pregnancy. For example:Antidepressants, especially SSRIs, are considered to be safe during pregnancy. However, antidepressant medications do cross the placental barrier and may reach the fetus. Birth defects or other problems are possible, but they are very rare. The effects of antidepressants on childhood development remain under study.Studies have also found that fetuses exposed to SSRIs during the third trimester may be born with "withdrawal" symptoms such as breathing problems, jitteriness, irritability, trouble feeding, or hypoglycemia (low blood sugar). Most studies have found that these symptoms in babies are generally mild and short-lived, and no deaths have been reported. Risks from the use of antidepressants need to be balanced with the risks of stopping medication; if a mother is too depressed to care for herself and her child, both may be at risk for problems.In 2004, the FDA issued a warning against the use of certain antidepressants in the late third trimester. The warning said that doctors may want to gradually taper pregnant women off antidepressants in the third trimester so that the baby is not affected. After a woman delivers, she should consult with her doctor to decide whether to return to a full dose during the period when she is most vulnerable to postpartum depression.After the baby is born, women and their doctors should watch for postpartum depression, especially if a mother stopped taking her medication during pregnancy. In addition, women who nurse while taking psychiatric medications should know that a small amount of the medication passes into the breast milk. However, the medication may or may not affect the baby depending s on the medication and when it is taken. Women taking psychiatric medications and who intend to breastfeed should discuss the potential risks and benefits with their doctors.The FDA is responsible for protecting the public health by ensuring the safety, efficacy and security of drugs (medications), biological products, medical devices, our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, and products that emit radiation.FDA is also responsible for advancing public health by helping to speed innovations that make medicines more effective, safer, and more affordable and by helping the public get accurate science-based information they need to use medicines and foods to maintain and improve their health.Visit FDA’s MedWatch to voluntarily report a serious adverse effect, product quality problem, product use error or product failure that you suspect is associated with the use of an FDA-regulated drug, biologic, medical device, dietary supplement or cosmetic. You can also report suspected counterfeit medical products to the FDA through MedWatch. You can also use the contact information provided below:1-800-332-10881-800-FDA-0178 FaxReport a Serious Problem: MedWatch OnlineRegular Mail: Use postage-paid FDA Form 3500Mail to: MedWatch, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857FDAs MedWatch program offers several ways to help you stay informed about the medical products are prescribed, administered, or dispensed every day. Get safety alerts delivered to your inbox. To subscribe, join the MedWatch email list. Learn more about the MedWatch E-list. You can also follow MedWatch on Twitter by following @FDAMedWatch.Last Revised: October 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuMedications can play a role in treating several mental disorders and conditions. Treatment may also include psychotherapy (also called “talk therapy”) and brain stimulation therapies (less common). In some cases, psychotherapy alone may be the best treatment option. Choosing the right treatment plan should be based on a person's individual needs and medical situation, and under a mental health professional’s care.The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), a Federal research agency, does not provide medical advice or referrals. Resources that may help you find treatment services in your area are listed on our Help for Mental Illnesses web page.NIMH also does not endorse or recommend any particular drug, herb, or supplement. Results from NIMH-supported clinical research trials (What are Clinical Research Trials?) that examine the effectiveness of treatments, including medications, are reported in the medical literature. This health topic webpage is intended to provide basic information about mental health medications. It is not a complete source for all medications available and should not be used as a guide for making medical decisions.Information about medications changes frequently. Check the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website for the latest warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications. Brand names are not referenced on this page, but you can search by brand name on MedlinePlus Drugs, Herbs and Supplements Drugs website. The MedlinePlus website also provides additional information about each medication, including side effects and FDA warnings.If you are prescribed a medication, be sure that you:Antidepressants are medications commonly used to treat depression. Antidepressants are also used for other health conditions, such as anxiety, pain and insomnia. Although antidepressants are not FDA-approved specifically to treat ADHD, antidepressants are sometimes used to treat ADHD in adults.The most popular types of antidepressants are called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Examples of SSRIs include:Other types of antidepressants are serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs). SNRIs are similar to SSRIs and include  venlafaxine and duloxetine.Another antidepressant that is commonly used is bupropion. Bupropion is a third type of antidepressant which works differently than either SSRIs or SNRIs.  Bupropion is also used to treat seasonal affective disorder and to help people stop smoking.SSRIs, SNRIs, and bupropion are popular because they do not cause as many side effects as older classes of antidepressants, and seem to help a broader group of depressive and anxiety disorders. Older antidepressant medications include tricyclics, tetracyclics, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). For some people, tricyclics, tetracyclics, or MAOIs may be the best medications.According to a research review by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, all antidepressant medications work about as well as each other to improve symptoms of depression and to keep depression symptoms from coming back. For reasons not yet well understood, some people respond better to some antidepressant medications than to others.Therefore, it is important to know that some people may not feel better with the first medicine they try and may need to try several medicines to find the one that works for them. Others may find that a medicine helped for a while, but their symptoms came back. It is important to carefully follow your doctor’s directions for taking your medicine at an adequate dose and over an extended period of time (often 4 to 6 weeks) for it to work.Once a person begins taking antidepressants, it is important to not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. Sometimes people taking antidepressants feel better and stop taking the medication too soon, and the depression may return. When it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help the person slowly and safely decrease the dose. It's important to give the body time to adjust to the change. People don't get addicted (or "hooked") on these medications, but stopping them abruptly may also cause withdrawal symptomsSome antidepressants may cause more side effects than others. You may need to try several different antidepressant medications before finding the one that improves your symptoms and that causes side effects that you can manage.The most common side effects listed by the FDA include:Call your doctor right away if you have any of the following symptoms, especially if they are new, worsening, or worry you(U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2011):Combining the newer SSRI or SNRI antidepressants with one of the commonly-used "triptan" medications used to treat migraine headaches could cause a life-threatening illness called "serotonin syndrome." A person with serotonin syndrome may be agitated, have hallucinations (see or hear things that are not real), have a high temperature, or have unusual blood pressure changes. Serotonin syndrome is usually associated with the older antidepressants called MAOIs, but it can happen with the newer antidepressants as well, if they are mixed with the wrong medications. For more information, please see the FDA Medication Guide on Antidepressant MedicinesAntidepressants may cause other side effects that were not included in this list. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of antidepressant medicines, please contact the FDA MedWatch program using the contact information at the bottom of this page. For more information about the risks and side effects for each medication, please see Drugs@FDA.Anti-anxiety medications help reduce the symptoms of anxiety, such as panic attacks, or extreme fear and worry. The most common anti-anxiety medications are called benzodiazepines. Benzodiazepines can treat generalized anxiety disorder. In the case of panic disorder or social phobia (social anxiety disorder), benzodiazepines are usually second-line treatments, behind SSRIs or other antidepressants.Benzodiazepines used to treat anxiety disorders include:Buspirone (which is unrelated to the benzodiazepines) is sometimes used for the long-term treatment of chronic anxiety. In contrast to the benzodiazepines, buspirone must be taken every day for a few weeks to reach its full effect. It is not useful on an “as-needed” basis.Anti-anxiety medications such as benzodiazepines are effective in relieving anxiety and take effect more quickly than the antidepressant medications (or buspirone) often prescribed for anxiety. However, people can build up a tolerance to benzodiazepines if they are taken over a long period of time and may need higher and higher doses to get the same effect. Some people may even become dependent on them. To avoid these problems, doctors usually prescribe benzodiazepines for short periods, a practice that is especially helpful for older adults (read the NIMH article: Despite Risks, Benzodiazepine Use Highest in Older People), people who have substance abuse problems and people who become dependent on medication easily. If people suddenly stop taking benzodiazepines, they may have withdrawal symptoms or their anxiety may return. Therefore, benzodiazepines should be tapered off slowly.Like other medications, anti-anxiety medications may cause side effects. Some of these side effects and risks are serious. The most common side effects for benzodiazepines are drowsiness and dizziness. Other possible side effects include:Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:If you experience any of the symptoms below, call your doctor immediately:Common side effects of beta-blockers include:Beta-blockers generally are not recommended for people with asthma or diabetes because they may worsen symptoms related to both.Possible side effects from buspirone include:Anti-anxiety medications may cause other side effects that are not included in the lists above. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of these medicines, please contact the FDA MedWatch program using the contact information at the bottom of this page. For more information about the risks and side effects for each medication, please see Drugs@FDA.As the name suggests, stimulants increase alertness, attention, and energy, as well as elevate blood pressure, heart rate, and respiration (National Institute on Drug Abuse, 2014). Stimulant medications are often prescribed to treat children, adolescents, or adults diagnosed with ADHD.Stimulants used to treat ADHD include:Note: In 2002, the FDA approved the non-stimulant medication atomoxetine for use as a treatment for ADHD. Two other non-stimulant antihypertensive medications, clonidine and guanfacine, are also approved for treatment of ADHD in children and adolescents. One of these non-stimulant medications is often tried first in a young person with ADHD, and if response is insufficient, then a stimulant is prescribed.Stimulants are also prescribed to treat other health conditions, including narcolepsy, and occasionally depression (especially in older or chronically medically ill people and in those who have not responded to other treatments).Prescription stimulants have a calming and “focusing” effect on individuals with ADHD. Stimulant medications are safe when given under a doctor's supervision. Some children taking them may feel slightly different or "funny."Some parents worry that stimulant medications may lead to drug abuse or dependence, but there is little evidence of this when they are used properly as prescribed. Additionally, research shows that teens with ADHD who took stimulant medications were less likely to abuse drugs than those who did not take stimulant medications.Stimulants may cause side effects. Most side effects are minor and disappear when dosage levels are lowered. The most common side effects include:Less common side effects include:Stimulants may cause other side effects that are not included in the list above. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of stimulants, please contact the FDA MedWatch program using the contact information at the bottom of this page. For more information about the risks and side effects for each medication, please see Drugs@FDA.Antipsychotic medicines are primarily used to manage psychosis. The word “psychosis” is used to describe conditions that affect the mind, and in which there has been some loss of contact with reality, often including delusions (false, fixed beliefs) or hallucinations (hearing or seeing things that are not really there). It can be a symptom of a physical condition such as drug abuse or a mental disorder such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or very severe depression (also known as “psychotic depression”).Antipsychotic medications are often used in combination with other medications to treat delirium, dementia, and mental health conditions, including:Antipsychotic medicines do not cure these conditions. They are used to help relieve symptoms and improve quality of life.Older or first-generation antipsychotic medications are also called conventional "typical" antipsychotics or “neuroleptics”. Some of the common typical antipsychotics include:Newer or second generation medications are also called "atypical" antipsychotics. Some of the common atypical antipsychotics include:According to a 2013 research review by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, typical and atypical antipsychotics both work to treat symptoms of schizophrenia and the manic phase of bipolar disorder.Several atypical antipsychotics have a “broader spectrum” of action than the older medications, and are used for treating bipolar depression or depression that has not responded to an antidepressant medication alone.To find additional antipsychotics and other medications used to manage psychoses and current warnings and advisories, please visit the FDA website.Certain symptoms, such as feeling agitated and having hallucinations, usually go away within days of starting an antipsychotic medication. Symptoms like delusions usually go away within a few weeks, but the full effects of the medication may not be seen for up to six weeks. Every patient responds differently, so it may take several trials of different antipsychotic medications to find the one that works best.Some people may have a relapse—meaning their symptoms come back or get worse. Usually relapses happen when people stop taking their medication, or when they only take it sometimes. Some people stop taking the medication because they feel better or they may feel that they don't need it anymore, but no one should stop taking an antipsychotic medication without talking to his or her doctor.When a doctor says it is okay to stop taking a medication, it should be gradually tapered off— never stopped suddenly. Many people must stay on an antipsychotic continuously for months or years in order to stay well; treatment should be personalized for each individual.What are the possible side effects of antipsychotics?Antipsychotics have many side effects (or adverse events) and risks. The FDA lists the following side effects of antipsychotic medicines:A person taking an atypical antipsychotic medication should have his or her weight, glucose levels, and lipid levels monitored regularly by a doctor.Typical antipsychotic medications can also cause additional side effects related to physical movement, such as:Long-term use of typical antipsychotic medications may lead to a condition called tardive dyskinesia (TD). TD causes muscle movements, commonly around the mouth, that a person can't control. TD can range from mild to severe, and in some people, the problem cannot be cured. Sometimes people with TD recover partially or fully after they stop taking typical antipsychotic medication. People who think that they might have TD should check with their doctor before stopping their medication. TD rarely occurs while taking atypical antipsychotics.Antipsychotics may cause other side effects that are not included in this list above. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of these medicines, please contact the FDA MedWatch program. For more information about the risks and side effects for antipsychotic medications, please visit Drugs@FDA.Mood stabilizers are used primarily to treat bipolar disorder, mood swings associated with other mental disorders, and in some cases, to augment the effect of other medications used to treat depression. Lithium, which is aneffective mood stabilizer, is approved for the treatment of mania and the maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder. A number of cohort studies describe anti-suicide benefits of lithium for individuals on long-term maintenance. Mood stabilizers work by decreasing abnormal activity in the brain and are also sometimes used to treat:Anticonvulsant medications are also used as mood stabilizers. They were originally developed to treat seizures, but they were found to help control unstable moods as well. One anticonvulsant commonly used as a mood stabilizer is valproic acid (also called divalproex sodium). For some people, especially those with “mixed” symptoms of mania and depression or those with rapid-cycling bipolar disorder, valproic acid may work better than lithium. Other anticonvulsants used as mood stabilizers include:What are the possible side effects of mood stabilizers?Mood stabilizers can cause several side effects, and some of them may become serious, especially at excessively high blood levels. These side effects include:If a person with bipolar disorder is being treated with lithium, he or she should visit the doctor regularly to check the lithium levels his or her blood, and make sure the kidneys and the thyroid are working normally.Lithium is eliminated from the body through the kidney, so the dose may need to be lowered in older people with reduced kidney function. Also, loss of water from the body, such as through sweating or diarrhea, can cause the lithium level to rise, requiring a temporary lowering of the daily dose. Although kidney functions are checked periodically during lithium treatment, actual damage of the kidney is uncommon in people whose blood levels of lithium have stayed within the therapeutic range.Mood stabilizers may cause other side effects that are not included in this list. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of these medicines, please contact the FDA MedWatch program using the contact information at the bottom of this page. For more information about the risks and side effects for each individual medication, please see Drugs@FDA.For more information on the side effects of Carbamazepine, Lamotrigine, and Oxcarbazepine, please visit MedlinePlus Drugs, Herbs and Supplements.Some possible side effects linked anticonvulsants (such as valproic acid) include:These medications may also:Medications for common adult health problems, such as diabetes, high blood pressure, anxiety, and depression may interact badly with anticonvulsants. In this case, a doctor can offer other medication options.For more information about the risks and side effects for each medication, please see Drugs@FDA.All types of people take psychiatric medications, but some groups have special needs, including:Many medications used to treat children and adolescents with mental illness are safe and effective. However, some medications have not been studied or approved for use with children or adolescents.Still, a doctor can give a young person an FDA-approved medication on an "off-label" basis. This means that the doctor prescribes the medication to help the patient even though the medicine is not approved for the specific mental disorder that is being treated or for use by patients under a certain age. Remember:In addition to medications, other treatments for children and adolescents should be considered, either to be tried first, with medication added later if necessary, or to be provided along with medication. Psychotherapy, family therapy, educational courses, and behavior management techniques can help everyone involved cope with disorders that affect a child’s mental health. Read more about child and adolescent mental health research.People over 65 have to be careful when taking medications, especially when they’re taking many different drugs. Older adults have a higher risk for experiencing bad drug interactions, missing doses, or overdosing.Older adults also tend to be more sensitive to medications. Even healthy older people react to medications differently than younger people because older people's bodies process and eliminate medications more slowly. Therefore, lower or less frequent doses may be needed for older adults. Before starting a medication, older people and their family members should talk carefully with a physician about whether a medication can affect alertness, memory, or coordination, and how to help ensure that prescribed medications do not increase the risk of falls.Sometimes memory problems affect older people who take medications for mental disorders. An older adult may forget his or her regular dose and take too much or not enough. A good way to keep track of medicine is to use a seven-day pill box, which can be bought at any pharmacy. At the beginning of each week, older adults and their caregivers fill the box so that it is easy to remember what medicine to take. Many pharmacies also have pill boxes with sections for medications that must be taken more than once a day.For more information and practical tips to help older people take their medicines safely, please see National Institute on Aging’s Safe Use of Medicines booklet and Taking Medicines on NIHSeniorHealth.gov.The research on the use of psychiatric medications during pregnancy is limited. The risks are different depending on which medication is taken, and at what point during the pregnancy the medication is taken. Decisions on treatments for all conditions during pregnancy should be based on each woman's needs and circumstances, and based on a careful weighing of the likely benefits and risks of all available options, including psychotherapy (or “watchful waiting” during part or all of the pregnancy), medication, or a combination of the two. While no medication is considered perfectly safe for all women at all stages of pregnancy, this must be balanced for each woman against the fact that untreated serious mental disorders themselves can pose a risk to a pregnant woman and her developing fetus. Medications should be selected based on available scientific research, and they should be taken at the lowest possible dose. Pregnant women should have a medical professional who will watch them closely throughout their pregnancy and after delivery.Most women should avoid certain medications during pregnancy. For example:Antidepressants, especially SSRIs, are considered to be safe during pregnancy. However, antidepressant medications do cross the placental barrier and may reach the fetus. Birth defects or other problems are possible, but they are very rare. The effects of antidepressants on childhood development remain under study.Studies have also found that fetuses exposed to SSRIs during the third trimester may be born with "withdrawal" symptoms such as breathing problems, jitteriness, irritability, trouble feeding, or hypoglycemia (low blood sugar). Most studies have found that these symptoms in babies are generally mild and short-lived, and no deaths have been reported. Risks from the use of antidepressants need to be balanced with the risks of stopping medication; if a mother is too depressed to care for herself and her child, both may be at risk for problems.In 2004, the FDA issued a warning against the use of certain antidepressants in the late third trimester. The warning said that doctors may want to gradually taper pregnant women off antidepressants in the third trimester so that the baby is not affected. After a woman delivers, she should consult with her doctor to decide whether to return to a full dose during the period when she is most vulnerable to postpartum depression.After the baby is born, women and their doctors should watch for postpartum depression, especially if a mother stopped taking her medication during pregnancy. In addition, women who nurse while taking psychiatric medications should know that a small amount of the medication passes into the breast milk. However, the medication may or may not affect the baby depending s on the medication and when it is taken. Women taking psychiatric medications and who intend to breastfeed should discuss the potential risks and benefits with their doctors.The FDA is responsible for protecting the public health by ensuring the safety, efficacy and security of drugs (medications), biological products, medical devices, our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, and products that emit radiation.FDA is also responsible for advancing public health by helping to speed innovations that make medicines more effective, safer, and more affordable and by helping the public get accurate science-based information they need to use medicines and foods to maintain and improve their health.Visit FDA’s MedWatch to voluntarily report a serious adverse effect, product quality problem, product use error or product failure that you suspect is associated with the use of an FDA-regulated drug, biologic, medical device, dietary supplement or cosmetic. You can also report suspected counterfeit medical products to the FDA through MedWatch. You can also use the contact information provided below:1-800-332-10881-800-FDA-0178 FaxReport a Serious Problem: MedWatch OnlineRegular Mail: Use postage-paid FDA Form 3500Mail to: MedWatch, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857FDAs MedWatch program offers several ways to help you stay informed about the medical products are prescribed, administered, or dispensed every day. Get safety alerts delivered to your inbox. To subscribe, join the MedWatch email list. Learn more about the MedWatch E-list. You can also follow MedWatch on Twitter by following @FDAMedWatch.Last Revised: October 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuMedications can play a role in treating several mental disorders and conditions. Treatment may also include psychotherapy (also called “talk therapy”) and brain stimulation therapies (less common). In some cases, psychotherapy alone may be the best treatment option. Choosing the right treatment plan should be based on a person's individual needs and medical situation, and under a mental health professional’s care.The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), a Federal research agency, does not provide medical advice or referrals. Resources that may help you find treatment services in your area are listed on our Help for Mental Illnesses web page.NIMH also does not endorse or recommend any particular drug, herb, or supplement. Results from NIMH-supported clinical research trials (What are Clinical Research Trials?) that examine the effectiveness of treatments, including medications, are reported in the medical literature. This health topic webpage is intended to provide basic information about mental health medications. It is not a complete source for all medications available and should not be used as a guide for making medical decisions.Information about medications changes frequently. Check the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website for the latest warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications. Brand names are not referenced on this page, but you can search by brand name on MedlinePlus Drugs, Herbs and Supplements Drugs website. The MedlinePlus website also provides additional information about each medication, including side effects and FDA warnings.If you are prescribed a medication, be sure that you:Antidepressants are medications commonly used to treat depression. Antidepressants are also used for other health conditions, such as anxiety, pain and insomnia. Although antidepressants are not FDA-approved specifically to treat ADHD, antidepressants are sometimes used to treat ADHD in adults.The most popular types of antidepressants are called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Examples of SSRIs include:Other types of antidepressants are serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs). SNRIs are similar to SSRIs and include  venlafaxine and duloxetine.Another antidepressant that is commonly used is bupropion. Bupropion is a third type of antidepressant which works differently than either SSRIs or SNRIs.  Bupropion is also used to treat seasonal affective disorder and to help people stop smoking.SSRIs, SNRIs, and bupropion are popular because they do not cause as many side effects as older classes of antidepressants, and seem to help a broader group of depressive and anxiety disorders. Older antidepressant medications include tricyclics, tetracyclics, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). For some people, tricyclics, tetracyclics, or MAOIs may be the best medications.According to a research review by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, all antidepressant medications work about as well as each other to improve symptoms of depression and to keep depression symptoms from coming back. For reasons not yet well understood, some people respond better to some antidepressant medications than to others.Therefore, it is important to know that some people may not feel better with the first medicine they try and may need to try several medicines to find the one that works for them. Others may find that a medicine helped for a while, but their symptoms came back. It is important to carefully follow your doctor’s directions for taking your medicine at an adequate dose and over an extended period of time (often 4 to 6 weeks) for it to work.Once a person begins taking antidepressants, it is important to not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. Sometimes people taking antidepressants feel better and stop taking the medication too soon, and the depression may return. When it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help the person slowly and safely decrease the dose. It's important to give the body time to adjust to the change. People don't get addicted (or "hooked") on these medications, but stopping them abruptly may also cause withdrawal symptomsSome antidepressants may cause more side effects than others. You may need to try several different antidepressant medications before finding the one that improves your symptoms and that causes side effects that you can manage.The most common side effects listed by the FDA include:Call your doctor right away if you have any of the following symptoms, especially if they are new, worsening, or worry you(U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2011):Combining the newer SSRI or SNRI antidepressants with one of the commonly-used "triptan" medications used to treat migraine headaches could cause a life-threatening illness called "serotonin syndrome." A person with serotonin syndrome may be agitated, have hallucinations (see or hear things that are not real), have a high temperature, or have unusual blood pressure changes. Serotonin syndrome is usually associated with the older antidepressants called MAOIs, but it can happen with the newer antidepressants as well, if they are mixed with the wrong medications. For more information, please see the FDA Medication Guide on Antidepressant MedicinesAntidepressants may cause other side effects that were not included in this list. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of antidepressant medicines, please contact the FDA MedWatch program using the contact information at the bottom of this page. For more information about the risks and side effects for each medication, please see Drugs@FDA.Anti-anxiety medications help reduce the symptoms of anxiety, such as panic attacks, or extreme fear and worry. The most common anti-anxiety medications are called benzodiazepines. Benzodiazepines can treat generalized anxiety disorder. In the case of panic disorder or social phobia (social anxiety disorder), benzodiazepines are usually second-line treatments, behind SSRIs or other antidepressants.Benzodiazepines used to treat anxiety disorders include:Buspirone (which is unrelated to the benzodiazepines) is sometimes used for the long-term treatment of chronic anxiety. In contrast to the benzodiazepines, buspirone must be taken every day for a few weeks to reach its full effect. It is not useful on an “as-needed” basis.Anti-anxiety medications such as benzodiazepines are effective in relieving anxiety and take effect more quickly than the antidepressant medications (or buspirone) often prescribed for anxiety. However, people can build up a tolerance to benzodiazepines if they are taken over a long period of time and may need higher and higher doses to get the same effect. Some people may even become dependent on them. To avoid these problems, doctors usually prescribe benzodiazepines for short periods, a practice that is especially helpful for older adults (read the NIMH article: Despite Risks, Benzodiazepine Use Highest in Older People), people who have substance abuse problems and people who become dependent on medication easily. If people suddenly stop taking benzodiazepines, they may have withdrawal symptoms or their anxiety may return. Therefore, benzodiazepines should be tapered off slowly.Like other medications, anti-anxiety medications may cause side effects. Some of these side effects and risks are serious. The most common side effects for benzodiazepines are drowsiness and dizziness. Other possible side effects include:Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:If you experience any of the symptoms below, call your doctor immediately:Common side effects of beta-blockers include:Beta-blockers generally are not recommended for people with asthma or diabetes because they may worsen symptoms related to both.Possible side effects from buspirone include:Anti-anxiety medications may cause other side effects that are not included in the lists above. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of these medicines, please contact the FDA MedWatch program using the contact information at the bottom of this page. For more information about the risks and side effects for each medication, please see Drugs@FDA.As the name suggests, stimulants increase alertness, attention, and energy, as well as elevate blood pressure, heart rate, and respiration (National Institute on Drug Abuse, 2014). Stimulant medications are often prescribed to treat children, adolescents, or adults diagnosed with ADHD.Stimulants used to treat ADHD include:Note: In 2002, the FDA approved the non-stimulant medication atomoxetine for use as a treatment for ADHD. Two other non-stimulant antihypertensive medications, clonidine and guanfacine, are also approved for treatment of ADHD in children and adolescents. One of these non-stimulant medications is often tried first in a young person with ADHD, and if response is insufficient, then a stimulant is prescribed.Stimulants are also prescribed to treat other health conditions, including narcolepsy, and occasionally depression (especially in older or chronically medically ill people and in those who have not responded to other treatments).Prescription stimulants have a calming and “focusing” effect on individuals with ADHD. Stimulant medications are safe when given under a doctor's supervision. Some children taking them may feel slightly different or "funny."Some parents worry that stimulant medications may lead to drug abuse or dependence, but there is little evidence of this when they are used properly as prescribed. Additionally, research shows that teens with ADHD who took stimulant medications were less likely to abuse drugs than those who did not take stimulant medications.Stimulants may cause side effects. Most side effects are minor and disappear when dosage levels are lowered. The most common side effects include:Less common side effects include:Stimulants may cause other side effects that are not included in the list above. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of stimulants, please contact the FDA MedWatch program using the contact information at the bottom of this page. For more information about the risks and side effects for each medication, please see Drugs@FDA.Antipsychotic medicines are primarily used to manage psychosis. The word “psychosis” is used to describe conditions that affect the mind, and in which there has been some loss of contact with reality, often including delusions (false, fixed beliefs) or hallucinations (hearing or seeing things that are not really there). It can be a symptom of a physical condition such as drug abuse or a mental disorder such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or very severe depression (also known as “psychotic depression”).Antipsychotic medications are often used in combination with other medications to treat delirium, dementia, and mental health conditions, including:Antipsychotic medicines do not cure these conditions. They are used to help relieve symptoms and improve quality of life.Older or first-generation antipsychotic medications are also called conventional "typical" antipsychotics or “neuroleptics”. Some of the common typical antipsychotics include:Newer or second generation medications are also called "atypical" antipsychotics. Some of the common atypical antipsychotics include:According to a 2013 research review by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, typical and atypical antipsychotics both work to treat symptoms of schizophrenia and the manic phase of bipolar disorder.Several atypical antipsychotics have a “broader spectrum” of action than the older medications, and are used for treating bipolar depression or depression that has not responded to an antidepressant medication alone.To find additional antipsychotics and other medications used to manage psychoses and current warnings and advisories, please visit the FDA website.Certain symptoms, such as feeling agitated and having hallucinations, usually go away within days of starting an antipsychotic medication. Symptoms like delusions usually go away within a few weeks, but the full effects of the medication may not be seen for up to six weeks. Every patient responds differently, so it may take several trials of different antipsychotic medications to find the one that works best.Some people may have a relapse—meaning their symptoms come back or get worse. Usually relapses happen when people stop taking their medication, or when they only take it sometimes. Some people stop taking the medication because they feel better or they may feel that they don't need it anymore, but no one should stop taking an antipsychotic medication without talking to his or her doctor.When a doctor says it is okay to stop taking a medication, it should be gradually tapered off— never stopped suddenly. Many people must stay on an antipsychotic continuously for months or years in order to stay well; treatment should be personalized for each individual.What are the possible side effects of antipsychotics?Antipsychotics have many side effects (or adverse events) and risks. The FDA lists the following side effects of antipsychotic medicines:A person taking an atypical antipsychotic medication should have his or her weight, glucose levels, and lipid levels monitored regularly by a doctor.Typical antipsychotic medications can also cause additional side effects related to physical movement, such as:Long-term use of typical antipsychotic medications may lead to a condition called tardive dyskinesia (TD). TD causes muscle movements, commonly around the mouth, that a person can't control. TD can range from mild to severe, and in some people, the problem cannot be cured. Sometimes people with TD recover partially or fully after they stop taking typical antipsychotic medication. People who think that they might have TD should check with their doctor before stopping their medication. TD rarely occurs while taking atypical antipsychotics.Antipsychotics may cause other side effects that are not included in this list above. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of these medicines, please contact the FDA MedWatch program. For more information about the risks and side effects for antipsychotic medications, please visit Drugs@FDA.Mood stabilizers are used primarily to treat bipolar disorder, mood swings associated with other mental disorders, and in some cases, to augment the effect of other medications used to treat depression. Lithium, which is aneffective mood stabilizer, is approved for the treatment of mania and the maintenance treatment of bipolar disorder. A number of cohort studies describe anti-suicide benefits of lithium for individuals on long-term maintenance. Mood stabilizers work by decreasing abnormal activity in the brain and are also sometimes used to treat:Anticonvulsant medications are also used as mood stabilizers. They were originally developed to treat seizures, but they were found to help control unstable moods as well. One anticonvulsant commonly used as a mood stabilizer is valproic acid (also called divalproex sodium). For some people, especially those with “mixed” symptoms of mania and depression or those with rapid-cycling bipolar disorder, valproic acid may work better than lithium. Other anticonvulsants used as mood stabilizers include:What are the possible side effects of mood stabilizers?Mood stabilizers can cause several side effects, and some of them may become serious, especially at excessively high blood levels. These side effects include:If a person with bipolar disorder is being treated with lithium, he or she should visit the doctor regularly to check the lithium levels his or her blood, and make sure the kidneys and the thyroid are working normally.Lithium is eliminated from the body through the kidney, so the dose may need to be lowered in older people with reduced kidney function. Also, loss of water from the body, such as through sweating or diarrhea, can cause the lithium level to rise, requiring a temporary lowering of the daily dose. Although kidney functions are checked periodically during lithium treatment, actual damage of the kidney is uncommon in people whose blood levels of lithium have stayed within the therapeutic range.Mood stabilizers may cause other side effects that are not included in this list. To report any serious adverse effects associated with the use of these medicines, please contact the FDA MedWatch program using the contact information at the bottom of this page. For more information about the risks and side effects for each individual medication, please see Drugs@FDA.For more information on the side effects of Carbamazepine, Lamotrigine, and Oxcarbazepine, please visit MedlinePlus Drugs, Herbs and Supplements.Some possible side effects linked anticonvulsants (such as valproic acid) include:These medications may also:Medications for common adult health problems, such as diabetes, high blood pressure, anxiety, and depression may interact badly with anticonvulsants. In this case, a doctor can offer other medication options.For more information about the risks and side effects for each medication, please see Drugs@FDA.All types of people take psychiatric medications, but some groups have special needs, including:Many medications used to treat children and adolescents with mental illness are safe and effective. However, some medications have not been studied or approved for use with children or adolescents.Still, a doctor can give a young person an FDA-approved medication on an "off-label" basis. This means that the doctor prescribes the medication to help the patient even though the medicine is not approved for the specific mental disorder that is being treated or for use by patients under a certain age. Remember:In addition to medications, other treatments for children and adolescents should be considered, either to be tried first, with medication added later if necessary, or to be provided along with medication. Psychotherapy, family therapy, educational courses, and behavior management techniques can help everyone involved cope with disorders that affect a child’s mental health. Read more about child and adolescent mental health research.People over 65 have to be careful when taking medications, especially when they’re taking many different drugs. Older adults have a higher risk for experiencing bad drug interactions, missing doses, or overdosing.Older adults also tend to be more sensitive to medications. Even healthy older people react to medications differently than younger people because older people's bodies process and eliminate medications more slowly. Therefore, lower or less frequent doses may be needed for older adults. Before starting a medication, older people and their family members should talk carefully with a physician about whether a medication can affect alertness, memory, or coordination, and how to help ensure that prescribed medications do not increase the risk of falls.Sometimes memory problems affect older people who take medications for mental disorders. An older adult may forget his or her regular dose and take too much or not enough. A good way to keep track of medicine is to use a seven-day pill box, which can be bought at any pharmacy. At the beginning of each week, older adults and their caregivers fill the box so that it is easy to remember what medicine to take. Many pharmacies also have pill boxes with sections for medications that must be taken more than once a day.For more information and practical tips to help older people take their medicines safely, please see National Institute on Aging’s Safe Use of Medicines booklet and Taking Medicines on NIHSeniorHealth.gov.The research on the use of psychiatric medications during pregnancy is limited. The risks are different depending on which medication is taken, and at what point during the pregnancy the medication is taken. Decisions on treatments for all conditions during pregnancy should be based on each woman's needs and circumstances, and based on a careful weighing of the likely benefits and risks of all available options, including psychotherapy (or “watchful waiting” during part or all of the pregnancy), medication, or a combination of the two. While no medication is considered perfectly safe for all women at all stages of pregnancy, this must be balanced for each woman against the fact that untreated serious mental disorders themselves can pose a risk to a pregnant woman and her developing fetus. Medications should be selected based on available scientific research, and they should be taken at the lowest possible dose. Pregnant women should have a medical professional who will watch them closely throughout their pregnancy and after delivery.Most women should avoid certain medications during pregnancy. For example:Antidepressants, especially SSRIs, are considered to be safe during pregnancy. However, antidepressant medications do cross the placental barrier and may reach the fetus. Birth defects or other problems are possible, but they are very rare. The effects of antidepressants on childhood development remain under study.Studies have also found that fetuses exposed to SSRIs during the third trimester may be born with "withdrawal" symptoms such as breathing problems, jitteriness, irritability, trouble feeding, or hypoglycemia (low blood sugar). Most studies have found that these symptoms in babies are generally mild and short-lived, and no deaths have been reported. Risks from the use of antidepressants need to be balanced with the risks of stopping medication; if a mother is too depressed to care for herself and her child, both may be at risk for problems.In 2004, the FDA issued a warning against the use of certain antidepressants in the late third trimester. The warning said that doctors may want to gradually taper pregnant women off antidepressants in the third trimester so that the baby is not affected. After a woman delivers, she should consult with her doctor to decide whether to return to a full dose during the period when she is most vulnerable to postpartum depression.After the baby is born, women and their doctors should watch for postpartum depression, especially if a mother stopped taking her medication during pregnancy. In addition, women who nurse while taking psychiatric medications should know that a small amount of the medication passes into the breast milk. However, the medication may or may not affect the baby depending s on the medication and when it is taken. Women taking psychiatric medications and who intend to breastfeed should discuss the potential risks and benefits with their doctors.The FDA is responsible for protecting the public health by ensuring the safety, efficacy and security of drugs (medications), biological products, medical devices, our nation’s food supply, cosmetics, and products that emit radiation.FDA is also responsible for advancing public health by helping to speed innovations that make medicines more effective, safer, and more affordable and by helping the public get accurate science-based information they need to use medicines and foods to maintain and improve their health.Visit FDA’s MedWatch to voluntarily report a serious adverse effect, product quality problem, product use error or product failure that you suspect is associated with the use of an FDA-regulated drug, biologic, medical device, dietary supplement or cosmetic. You can also report suspected counterfeit medical products to the FDA through MedWatch. You can also use the contact information provided below:1-800-332-10881-800-FDA-0178 FaxReport a Serious Problem: MedWatch OnlineRegular Mail: Use postage-paid FDA Form 3500Mail to: MedWatch, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857FDAs MedWatch program offers several ways to help you stay informed about the medical products are prescribed, administered, or dispensed every day. Get safety alerts delivered to your inbox. To subscribe, join the MedWatch email list. Learn more about the MedWatch E-list. You can also follow MedWatch on Twitter by following @FDAMedWatch.Last Revised: October 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you feel very tired, helpless, and hopeless?Have you lost interest in many of the activities and interests you previously enjoyed?Are you having trouble working, sleeping, eating, and functioning?Have you felt this way day after day?If you answered yes, you may be experiencing depression.As you get older, you may go through a lot of changes—death of loved ones, retirement, stressful life events, or medical problems. It’s normal to feel uneasy, stressed, or sad about these changes. But after adjusting, many older adults feel well again.Depression is different. It is a medical condition that interferes with daily life and normal functioning. It is not a normal part of aging, a sign of weakness, or a character flaw. Many older adults with depression need treatment to feel better.There are several types of depression. The most common include:Depression may sometimes be undiagnosed or misdiagnosed in some older adults because sadness is not their main symptom. They may have other, less obvious symptoms of depression or they may not be willing to talk about their feelings. It is important to know the signs and seek help if you are concerned.Depression has many symptoms, including physical ones. If you have been experiencing several of the following symptoms for at least two weeks, you may be suffering from depression:Although most cases of depression are diagnosed in young adults, depression can occur at any age. Certain people are at a higher risk for developing depression. If you are an older adult, you may be at a higher risk if you:You may also be at a higher risk if you:If you think that you or a loved one may have depression, it is important to seek treatment. A person with depression cannot simply “snap out of it”—it is a medical condition that affects your quality of life. Depression can also lead to suicide, particularly if left untreated, and you are more likely to develop a physical illness if you have depression.The good news is that, in most cases, depression is treatable in older adults. The right treatment may help improve your overall health and quality of life. With the right treatment, you may begin to see improvements as early as two weeks from the start of your therapy. Some symptoms may start to improve within a week or two, but it may be several weeks before you feel the full effect.If you think you have depression, the first step is to talk to your doctor or health care provider. Your doctor will review your medical history and do a physical exam to rule out other conditions that may be causing or contributing to your depression symptoms. He or she may also ask you a series of questions about how you’re feeling. It is important to be open and honest about your symptoms, even if you feel embarrassed or shy.If other factors can be ruled out, the doctor may refer you to a mental health professional, such as a psychologist, counselor, social worker, or psychiatrist. Some providers are specially trained to treat depression and other emotional problems in older adults.The primary treatment options for depression include medication and psychotherapy. It is important to remember that as doctors and therapists develop a personalized treatment plan for each individual, different treatments or treatment combinations sometimes might be tried until you find one that works for you.Medications called antidepressants can work well to treat depression. While some symptoms usually begin to improve within a week or two, they can take several weeks to work fully. As with most medications, many people experience some side effects, which in most cases can be managed or minimized. The most common side effects of antidepressants include:Antidepressants may cause other side effects that are not included in this list. Most side effects lessen over time. If you are taking antidepressants, talk to your doctor about any side effects that you are experiencing, especially if they are new, worsen over time, or worry you. Often, temporarily lowering the dose or switching to a different medication will help when side effects are problematic. If you have thoughts of suicide or experience any unusual changes in mood and behavior, call your doctor right away.People over 65 have to be careful when taking medications, especially when they’re taking medications for different conditions. Older adults have a higher risk for experiencing bad drug interactions, missing doses, or overdosing. Be sure to tell every doctor you see about all of the medications you are being prescribed. It is also a good idea to get all of your medications from the same pharmacy; pharmacists are excellent sources of information about medications and will alert you and your doctors if there are concerns about a possible interaction between medications—which can happen inadvertently when a doctor is not familiar with a medication being prescribed for a different condition by a different health care provider.Older adults also tend to be more sensitive to medications. Therefore, lower or less frequent doses may be needed. Before starting a medication, older adults and their family members should talk with a doctor about whether a medication can affect alertness, memory, or coordination, and how to help ensure that prescribed medications do not increase the risk of falls. If you have trouble remembering to take multiple doses of medicines throughout the day, your doctor may want to prescribe one of the antidepressants that require just one dose daily; either way, antidepressants must be taken every single day, not just “as needed.”If you are taking antidepressants, it is important to not stop taking them without the help of a doctor.Even after you are feeling back to yourself, antidepressants should be continued for a number of months to prevent depression symptoms from returning. When it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease the dose. It’s important to give the body time to adjust to the change. People don’t get addicted to (or “hooked on”) these medications, but stopping them abruptly may cause withdrawal symptoms.Psychotherapy (or “talk therapy”) can also be an effective treatment for depression. It helps by teaching new ways of thinking and behaving, and changing habits that may contribute to the depression. Psychotherapy can help you understand and work through difficult relationships or situations that may be causing your depression or making it worse. Research shows that cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), including a version called problem-solving therapy, may be an especially useful type of psychotherapy for treating older adults and improving their quality of life.Research also suggests that for older adults, psychotherapy is just as likely to be an effective first treatment for depression as taking an antidepressant. Some older adults prefer to get counseling or psychotherapy for depression rather than add more medications to those they are already taking for other conditions. However, if your depression is severe or if you are coping with other serious illnesses, medication or a combination of medications with psychotherapy may be a more effective approach.Examples of complementary therapies for depression include yoga, exercise, and certain dietary supplements. These therapies may offer some benefits for people with depression; however, they should not replace talking to your health care professional or continuing with the treatment plan determined with that doctor. Tell your health care professional about any complementary health approaches you use or plan to use. This will help ensure your safety. Physical activity is a helpful part of any treatment plan for depression, and may become easier to add as a person starts to feel better as antidepressant medication and/or psychotherapy begin to work. Talk to your health care professional about your options and visit the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health to learn more about these types of therapies: www.nccih.nih.gov.Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is sometimes used for severe depression that is very difficult to treat and does not respond to medication or psychotherapy. ECT is a type of brain stimulation therapy, a class of treatments which involve activating the brain directly with electricity, magnets, or implants. Some of these treatments are still at the experimental stage. If your depression persists despite adequate trials of medication, or if your depression is so severe that you are unable to eat or you develop false, fixed beliefs (“delusions”) about your illness, your doctor may recommend ECT as the best option. Although it has been in use for almost 80 years, ECT remains the strongest and fastest-acting treatment for severe depression.Despite ECT’s efficacy and safety record in older adults, many misconceptions still persist among both patients and health care professionals. ECT can be safe and highly effective for severe, treatment-resistant depression, as well as a variety of other serious mental disorders. ECT may cause side effects, such as confusion and memory loss. Although these side effects are usually short-term, they can sometimes linger.As you continue treatment, you may gradually start to feel better. Remember that if you are taking medication, it may take several weeks for it to start working. If the first medication does not work, be open to trying another. You may need to try a few different medications before finding one that works for you. Sometimes, if an antidepressant medication is only partially effective, adding a second medication of a different type can be helpful.Try to do things that you used to enjoy before you had depression. Studies have shown that doing these things, even when you don’t expect to enjoy them, can help lift your spirits. Go easy on yourself. Other things that may help:Older adults with depression are at risk for suicide. If you are thinking about harming yourself or attempting suicide, tell someone who can help immediately.If you know someone who has depression, first help him or her see a doctor or mental health professional. Several ways you can help an older adult with depression is to:NIMH has a variety of publications on depression available at www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/. If you need additional information and support, you may find the following resources to be helpful:Clinical Trials and You Clinical trials are part of clinical research and at the heart of all medical advances. Clinical trials look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat disease. Treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. All clinical trials have particular requirements to match potential subjects with studies, such as age range or acceptable other conditions/medications. To learn more about participating in a clinical trial, please visit www.nih.gov/health/clinicaltrials/index.htm and use search terms such as “geriatric depression” or “depression and older adults.”Locate Affordable Health Care in Your Area Within the Federal Government, a bureau of the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) provides a Health Center Database for a nationwide directory of clinics to obtain low or no-cost health care. Start your search at www.findahealthcenter.hrsa.gov/.Mental Health Treatment Program Locator The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) provides the Mental Health Treatment Program Locator, which is an online resource for locating mental health treatment facilities and programs. The Mental Health Treatment Locator section of the Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator lists facilities providing mental health services to persons with mental disorders. Find a facility in your state at www.findtreatment.samhsa.gov/.NIHSeniorHealth.Gov NIHSeniorHealth.gov is a website for older adults that makes aging-related health information easily accessible for family members and friends seeking reliable, easy-to-understand online health information. This site was developed by the National Institute on Aging (NIA) and the National Library of Medicine (NLM), both part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Visit at www.nihseniorhealth.gov/.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to follow these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or e-mail at nimhinfo@nih.gov.National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and CommunicationsScience Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch6001 Executive BoulevardRoom 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-freeTTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-freeFAX: 301-443-4279E-mail: nimhinfo@nih.govWebsite: www.nimh.nih.govU.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICESNational Institutes of HealthNational Institute of Mental HealthNIH Publication No. QF 16-7697The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDo you feel very tired, helpless, and hopeless?Have you lost interest in many of the activities and interests you previously enjoyed?Are you having trouble working, sleeping, eating, and functioning?Have you felt this way day after day?If you answered yes, you may be experiencing depression.As you get older, you may go through a lot of changes—death of loved ones, retirement, stressful life events, or medical problems. It’s normal to feel uneasy, stressed, or sad about these changes. But after adjusting, many older adults feel well again.Depression is different. It is a medical condition that interferes with daily life and normal functioning. It is not a normal part of aging, a sign of weakness, or a character flaw. Many older adults with depression need treatment to feel better.There are several types of depression. The most common include:Depression may sometimes be undiagnosed or misdiagnosed in some older adults because sadness is not their main symptom. They may have other, less obvious symptoms of depression or they may not be willing to talk about their feelings. It is important to know the signs and seek help if you are concerned.Depression has many symptoms, including physical ones. If you have been experiencing several of the following symptoms for at least two weeks, you may be suffering from depression:Although most cases of depression are diagnosed in young adults, depression can occur at any age. Certain people are at a higher risk for developing depression. If you are an older adult, you may be at a higher risk if you:You may also be at a higher risk if you:If you think that you or a loved one may have depression, it is important to seek treatment. A person with depression cannot simply “snap out of it”—it is a medical condition that affects your quality of life. Depression can also lead to suicide, particularly if left untreated, and you are more likely to develop a physical illness if you have depression.The good news is that, in most cases, depression is treatable in older adults. The right treatment may help improve your overall health and quality of life. With the right treatment, you may begin to see improvements as early as two weeks from the start of your therapy. Some symptoms may start to improve within a week or two, but it may be several weeks before you feel the full effect.If you think you have depression, the first step is to talk to your doctor or health care provider. Your doctor will review your medical history and do a physical exam to rule out other conditions that may be causing or contributing to your depression symptoms. He or she may also ask you a series of questions about how you’re feeling. It is important to be open and honest about your symptoms, even if you feel embarrassed or shy.If other factors can be ruled out, the doctor may refer you to a mental health professional, such as a psychologist, counselor, social worker, or psychiatrist. Some providers are specially trained to treat depression and other emotional problems in older adults.The primary treatment options for depression include medication and psychotherapy. It is important to remember that as doctors and therapists develop a personalized treatment plan for each individual, different treatments or treatment combinations sometimes might be tried until you find one that works for you.Medications called antidepressants can work well to treat depression. While some symptoms usually begin to improve within a week or two, they can take several weeks to work fully. As with most medications, many people experience some side effects, which in most cases can be managed or minimized. The most common side effects of antidepressants include:Antidepressants may cause other side effects that are not included in this list. Most side effects lessen over time. If you are taking antidepressants, talk to your doctor about any side effects that you are experiencing, especially if they are new, worsen over time, or worry you. Often, temporarily lowering the dose or switching to a different medication will help when side effects are problematic. If you have thoughts of suicide or experience any unusual changes in mood and behavior, call your doctor right away.People over 65 have to be careful when taking medications, especially when they’re taking medications for different conditions. Older adults have a higher risk for experiencing bad drug interactions, missing doses, or overdosing. Be sure to tell every doctor you see about all of the medications you are being prescribed. It is also a good idea to get all of your medications from the same pharmacy; pharmacists are excellent sources of information about medications and will alert you and your doctors if there are concerns about a possible interaction between medications—which can happen inadvertently when a doctor is not familiar with a medication being prescribed for a different condition by a different health care provider.Older adults also tend to be more sensitive to medications. Therefore, lower or less frequent doses may be needed. Before starting a medication, older adults and their family members should talk with a doctor about whether a medication can affect alertness, memory, or coordination, and how to help ensure that prescribed medications do not increase the risk of falls. If you have trouble remembering to take multiple doses of medicines throughout the day, your doctor may want to prescribe one of the antidepressants that require just one dose daily; either way, antidepressants must be taken every single day, not just “as needed.”If you are taking antidepressants, it is important to not stop taking them without the help of a doctor.Even after you are feeling back to yourself, antidepressants should be continued for a number of months to prevent depression symptoms from returning. When it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease the dose. It’s important to give the body time to adjust to the change. People don’t get addicted to (or “hooked on”) these medications, but stopping them abruptly may cause withdrawal symptoms.Psychotherapy (or “talk therapy”) can also be an effective treatment for depression. It helps by teaching new ways of thinking and behaving, and changing habits that may contribute to the depression. Psychotherapy can help you understand and work through difficult relationships or situations that may be causing your depression or making it worse. Research shows that cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), including a version called problem-solving therapy, may be an especially useful type of psychotherapy for treating older adults and improving their quality of life.Research also suggests that for older adults, psychotherapy is just as likely to be an effective first treatment for depression as taking an antidepressant. Some older adults prefer to get counseling or psychotherapy for depression rather than add more medications to those they are already taking for other conditions. However, if your depression is severe or if you are coping with other serious illnesses, medication or a combination of medications with psychotherapy may be a more effective approach.Examples of complementary therapies for depression include yoga, exercise, and certain dietary supplements. These therapies may offer some benefits for people with depression; however, they should not replace talking to your health care professional or continuing with the treatment plan determined with that doctor. Tell your health care professional about any complementary health approaches you use or plan to use. This will help ensure your safety. Physical activity is a helpful part of any treatment plan for depression, and may become easier to add as a person starts to feel better as antidepressant medication and/or psychotherapy begin to work. Talk to your health care professional about your options and visit the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health to learn more about these types of therapies: www.nccih.nih.gov.Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is sometimes used for severe depression that is very difficult to treat and does not respond to medication or psychotherapy. ECT is a type of brain stimulation therapy, a class of treatments which involve activating the brain directly with electricity, magnets, or implants. Some of these treatments are still at the experimental stage. If your depression persists despite adequate trials of medication, or if your depression is so severe that you are unable to eat or you develop false, fixed beliefs (“delusions”) about your illness, your doctor may recommend ECT as the best option. Although it has been in use for almost 80 years, ECT remains the strongest and fastest-acting treatment for severe depression.Despite ECT’s efficacy and safety record in older adults, many misconceptions still persist among both patients and health care professionals. ECT can be safe and highly effective for severe, treatment-resistant depression, as well as a variety of other serious mental disorders. ECT may cause side effects, such as confusion and memory loss. Although these side effects are usually short-term, they can sometimes linger.As you continue treatment, you may gradually start to feel better. Remember that if you are taking medication, it may take several weeks for it to start working. If the first medication does not work, be open to trying another. You may need to try a few different medications before finding one that works for you. Sometimes, if an antidepressant medication is only partially effective, adding a second medication of a different type can be helpful.Try to do things that you used to enjoy before you had depression. Studies have shown that doing these things, even when you don’t expect to enjoy them, can help lift your spirits. Go easy on yourself. Other things that may help:Older adults with depression are at risk for suicide. If you are thinking about harming yourself or attempting suicide, tell someone who can help immediately.If you know someone who has depression, first help him or her see a doctor or mental health professional. Several ways you can help an older adult with depression is to:NIMH has a variety of publications on depression available at www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/. If you need additional information and support, you may find the following resources to be helpful:Clinical Trials and You Clinical trials are part of clinical research and at the heart of all medical advances. Clinical trials look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat disease. Treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. All clinical trials have particular requirements to match potential subjects with studies, such as age range or acceptable other conditions/medications. To learn more about participating in a clinical trial, please visit www.nih.gov/health/clinicaltrials/index.htm and use search terms such as “geriatric depression” or “depression and older adults.”Locate Affordable Health Care in Your Area Within the Federal Government, a bureau of the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) provides a Health Center Database for a nationwide directory of clinics to obtain low or no-cost health care. Start your search at www.findahealthcenter.hrsa.gov/.Mental Health Treatment Program Locator The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) provides the Mental Health Treatment Program Locator, which is an online resource for locating mental health treatment facilities and programs. The Mental Health Treatment Locator section of the Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator lists facilities providing mental health services to persons with mental disorders. Find a facility in your state at www.findtreatment.samhsa.gov/.NIHSeniorHealth.Gov NIHSeniorHealth.gov is a website for older adults that makes aging-related health information easily accessible for family members and friends seeking reliable, easy-to-understand online health information. This site was developed by the National Institute on Aging (NIA) and the National Library of Medicine (NLM), both part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Visit at www.nihseniorhealth.gov/.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to follow these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1-866-615-6464 or e-mail at nimhinfo@nih.gov.National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and CommunicationsScience Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch6001 Executive BoulevardRoom 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-freeTTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-freeFAX: 301-443-4279E-mail: nimhinfo@nih.govWebsite: www.nimh.nih.govU.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICESNational Institutes of HealthNational Institute of Mental HealthNIH Publication No. QF 16-7697The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuPTSD is a disorder that develops in some people who have experienced a shocking, scary, or dangerous event.It is natural to feel afraid during and after a traumatic situation. Fear triggers many split-second changes in the body to help defend against danger or to avoid it. This “fight-or-flight” response is a typical reaction meant to protect a person from harm. Nearly everyone will experience a range of reactions after trauma, yet most people recover from initial symptoms naturally. Those who continue to experience problems may be diagnosed with PTSD. People who have PTSD may feel stressed or frightened even when they are not in danger.Not every traumatized person develops ongoing (chronic) or even short-term (acute) PTSD. Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some experiences, like the sudden, unexpected death of a loved one, can also cause PTSD. Symptoms usually begin early, within 3 months of the traumatic incident, but sometimes they begin years afterward. Symptoms must last more than a month and be severe enough to interfere with relationships or work to be considered PTSD. The course of the illness varies. Some people recover within 6 months, while others have symptoms that last much longer. In some people, the condition becomes chronic.A doctor who has experience helping people with mental illnesses, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist, can diagnose PTSD.To be diagnosed with PTSD, an adult must have all of the following for at least 1 month:Re-experiencing symptoms may cause problems in a person’s everyday routine. The symptoms can start from the person’s own thoughts and feelings. Words, objects, or situations that are reminders of the event can also trigger re-experiencing symptoms.Things that remind a person of the traumatic event can trigger avoidance symptoms. These symptoms may cause a person to change his or her personal routine. For example, after a bad car accident, a person who usually drives may avoid driving or riding in a car.Arousal symptoms are usually constant, instead of being triggered by things that remind one of the traumatic events. These symptoms can make the person feel stressed and angry. They may make it hard to do daily tasks, such as sleeping, eating, or concentrating.Cognition and mood symptoms can begin or worsen after the traumatic event, but are not due to injury or substance use. These symptoms can make the person feel alienated or detached from friends or family members.It is natural to have some of these symptoms after a dangerous event. Sometimes people have very serious symptoms that go away after a few weeks. This is called acute stress disorder, or ASD. When the symptoms last more than a month, seriously affect one’s ability to function, and are not due to substance use, medical illness, or anything except the event itself, they might be PTSD. Some people with PTSD don’t show any symptoms for weeks or months. PTSD is often accompanied by depression, substance abuse, or one or more of the other anxiety disorders.Children and teens can have extreme reactions to trauma, but their symptoms may not be the same as adults. In very young children (less than 6 years of age), these symptoms can include:Older children and teens are more likely to show symptoms similar to those seen in adults. They may also develop disruptive, disrespectful, or destructive behaviors. Older children and teens may feel guilty for not preventing injury or deaths. They may also have thoughts of revenge. For additional information, visit the Learn More section below. The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) offers free print materials in English and Spanish. These can be read online, downloaded, or delivered to you in the mail.Anyone can develop PTSD at any age. This includes war veterans, children, and people who have been through a physical or sexual assault, abuse, accident, disaster, or many other serious events. According to the National Center for PTSD, about 7 or 8 out of every 100 people will experience PTSD at some point in their lives. Women are more likely to develop PTSD than men, and genes may make some people more likely to develop PTSD than others.Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some people develop PTSD after a friend or family member experiences danger or harm. The sudden, unexpected death of a loved one can also lead to PTSD.It is important to remember that not everyone who lives through a dangerous event develops PTSD. In fact, most people will not develop the disorder.Many factors play a part in whether a person will develop PTSD. Some examples are listed below. Risk factors make a person more likely to develop PTSD. Other factors, called resilience factors, can help reduce the risk of the disorder.Some factors that increase risk for PTSD include:Some resilience factors that may reduce the risk of PTSD include:Researchers are studying the importance of these and other risk and resilience factors, including genetics and neurobiology. With more research, someday it may be possible to predict who is likely to develop PTSD and to prevent it.The main treatments for people with PTSD are medications, psychotherapy (“talk” therapy), or both. Everyone is different, and PTSD affects people differently so a treatment that works for one person may not work for another. It is important for anyone with PTSD to be treated by a mental health provider who is experienced with PTSD. Some people with PTSD need to try different treatments to find what works for their symptoms.If someone with PTSD is going through an ongoing trauma, such as being in an abusive relationship, both of the problems need to be addressed. Other ongoing problems can include panic disorder, depression, substance abuse, and feeling suicidal.The most studied medications for treating PTSD include antidepressants, which may help control PTSD symptoms such as sadness, worry, anger, and feeling numb inside. Antidepressants and other medications may be prescribed along with psychotherapy. Other medications may be helpful for specific PTSD symptoms. For example, although it is not currently FDA approved, research has shown that Prazosin may be helpful with sleep problems, particularly nightmares, commonly experienced by people with PTSD.Doctors and patients can work together to find the best medication or medication combination, as well as the right dose. Check the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website (http://www.fda.gov/) for the latest information on patient medication guides, warnings, or newly approved medications.Psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk therapy”) involves talking with a mental health professional to treat a mental illness. Psychotherapy can occur one-on-one or in a group. Talk therapy treatment for PTSD usually lasts 6 to 12 weeks, but it can last longer. Research shows that support from family and friends can be an important part of recovery.Many types of psychotherapy can help people with PTSD. Some types target the symptoms of PTSD directly. Other therapies focus on social, family, or job-related problems. The doctor or therapist may combine different therapies depending on each person’s needs.Effective psychotherapies tend to emphasize a few key components, including education about symptoms, teaching skills to help identify the triggers of symptoms, and skills to manage the symptoms. One helpful form of therapy is called cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT. CBT can include:There are other types of treatment that can help as well. People with PTSD should talk about all treatment options with a therapist. Treatment should equip individuals with the skills to manage their symptoms and help them participate in activities that they enjoyed before developing PTSD.How Talk Therapies Help People Overcome PTSD  Talk therapies teach people helpful ways to react to the frightening events that trigger their PTSD symptoms. Based on this general goal, different types of therapy may:It may be very hard to take that first step to help yourself. It is important to realize that although it may take some time, with treatment, you can get better. If you are unsure where to go for help, ask your family doctor. You can also check NIMH's Help for Mental Illnesses page or search online for “mental health providers,” “social services,” “hotlines,” or “physicians” for phone numbers and addresses. An emergency room doctor can also provide temporary help and can tell you where and how to get further help. To help yourself while in treatment:Caring for yourself and others is especially important when large numbers of people are exposed to traumatic events (such as natural disasters, accidents, and violent acts). For more information, see the Learn More section, below.In the last decade, progress in research on the mental and biological foundations of PTSD has lead scientists to focus on better understanding the underlying causes of why people experience a range of reactions to trauma.Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including PTSD. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Doctors at NIMH are dedicated to mental health research. The studies take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with one of our clinicians. Find NIH-funded studies currently recruiting participants with PTSD by using ClinicalTrials.gov (search: PTSD).To search for a clinical trial near you, you can visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial's purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers to call for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.You can download or order free copies of the following booklets and brochures in English or en Español:Last Revised: February 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About Post-Traumatic Stress DisorderThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuPTSD is a disorder that develops in some people who have experienced a shocking, scary, or dangerous event.It is natural to feel afraid during and after a traumatic situation. Fear triggers many split-second changes in the body to help defend against danger or to avoid it. This “fight-or-flight” response is a typical reaction meant to protect a person from harm. Nearly everyone will experience a range of reactions after trauma, yet most people recover from initial symptoms naturally. Those who continue to experience problems may be diagnosed with PTSD. People who have PTSD may feel stressed or frightened even when they are not in danger.Not every traumatized person develops ongoing (chronic) or even short-term (acute) PTSD. Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some experiences, like the sudden, unexpected death of a loved one, can also cause PTSD. Symptoms usually begin early, within 3 months of the traumatic incident, but sometimes they begin years afterward. Symptoms must last more than a month and be severe enough to interfere with relationships or work to be considered PTSD. The course of the illness varies. Some people recover within 6 months, while others have symptoms that last much longer. In some people, the condition becomes chronic.A doctor who has experience helping people with mental illnesses, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist, can diagnose PTSD.To be diagnosed with PTSD, an adult must have all of the following for at least 1 month:Re-experiencing symptoms may cause problems in a person’s everyday routine. The symptoms can start from the person’s own thoughts and feelings. Words, objects, or situations that are reminders of the event can also trigger re-experiencing symptoms.Things that remind a person of the traumatic event can trigger avoidance symptoms. These symptoms may cause a person to change his or her personal routine. For example, after a bad car accident, a person who usually drives may avoid driving or riding in a car.Arousal symptoms are usually constant, instead of being triggered by things that remind one of the traumatic events. These symptoms can make the person feel stressed and angry. They may make it hard to do daily tasks, such as sleeping, eating, or concentrating.Cognition and mood symptoms can begin or worsen after the traumatic event, but are not due to injury or substance use. These symptoms can make the person feel alienated or detached from friends or family members.It is natural to have some of these symptoms after a dangerous event. Sometimes people have very serious symptoms that go away after a few weeks. This is called acute stress disorder, or ASD. When the symptoms last more than a month, seriously affect one’s ability to function, and are not due to substance use, medical illness, or anything except the event itself, they might be PTSD. Some people with PTSD don’t show any symptoms for weeks or months. PTSD is often accompanied by depression, substance abuse, or one or more of the other anxiety disorders.Children and teens can have extreme reactions to trauma, but their symptoms may not be the same as adults. In very young children (less than 6 years of age), these symptoms can include:Older children and teens are more likely to show symptoms similar to those seen in adults. They may also develop disruptive, disrespectful, or destructive behaviors. Older children and teens may feel guilty for not preventing injury or deaths. They may also have thoughts of revenge. For additional information, visit the Learn More section below. The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) offers free print materials in English and Spanish. These can be read online, downloaded, or delivered to you in the mail.Anyone can develop PTSD at any age. This includes war veterans, children, and people who have been through a physical or sexual assault, abuse, accident, disaster, or many other serious events. According to the National Center for PTSD, about 7 or 8 out of every 100 people will experience PTSD at some point in their lives. Women are more likely to develop PTSD than men, and genes may make some people more likely to develop PTSD than others.Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some people develop PTSD after a friend or family member experiences danger or harm. The sudden, unexpected death of a loved one can also lead to PTSD.It is important to remember that not everyone who lives through a dangerous event develops PTSD. In fact, most people will not develop the disorder.Many factors play a part in whether a person will develop PTSD. Some examples are listed below. Risk factors make a person more likely to develop PTSD. Other factors, called resilience factors, can help reduce the risk of the disorder.Some factors that increase risk for PTSD include:Some resilience factors that may reduce the risk of PTSD include:Researchers are studying the importance of these and other risk and resilience factors, including genetics and neurobiology. With more research, someday it may be possible to predict who is likely to develop PTSD and to prevent it.The main treatments for people with PTSD are medications, psychotherapy (“talk” therapy), or both. Everyone is different, and PTSD affects people differently so a treatment that works for one person may not work for another. It is important for anyone with PTSD to be treated by a mental health provider who is experienced with PTSD. Some people with PTSD need to try different treatments to find what works for their symptoms.If someone with PTSD is going through an ongoing trauma, such as being in an abusive relationship, both of the problems need to be addressed. Other ongoing problems can include panic disorder, depression, substance abuse, and feeling suicidal.The most studied medications for treating PTSD include antidepressants, which may help control PTSD symptoms such as sadness, worry, anger, and feeling numb inside. Antidepressants and other medications may be prescribed along with psychotherapy. Other medications may be helpful for specific PTSD symptoms. For example, although it is not currently FDA approved, research has shown that Prazosin may be helpful with sleep problems, particularly nightmares, commonly experienced by people with PTSD.Doctors and patients can work together to find the best medication or medication combination, as well as the right dose. Check the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website (http://www.fda.gov/) for the latest information on patient medication guides, warnings, or newly approved medications.Psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk therapy”) involves talking with a mental health professional to treat a mental illness. Psychotherapy can occur one-on-one or in a group. Talk therapy treatment for PTSD usually lasts 6 to 12 weeks, but it can last longer. Research shows that support from family and friends can be an important part of recovery.Many types of psychotherapy can help people with PTSD. Some types target the symptoms of PTSD directly. Other therapies focus on social, family, or job-related problems. The doctor or therapist may combine different therapies depending on each person’s needs.Effective psychotherapies tend to emphasize a few key components, including education about symptoms, teaching skills to help identify the triggers of symptoms, and skills to manage the symptoms. One helpful form of therapy is called cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT. CBT can include:There are other types of treatment that can help as well. People with PTSD should talk about all treatment options with a therapist. Treatment should equip individuals with the skills to manage their symptoms and help them participate in activities that they enjoyed before developing PTSD.How Talk Therapies Help People Overcome PTSD  Talk therapies teach people helpful ways to react to the frightening events that trigger their PTSD symptoms. Based on this general goal, different types of therapy may:It may be very hard to take that first step to help yourself. It is important to realize that although it may take some time, with treatment, you can get better. If you are unsure where to go for help, ask your family doctor. You can also check NIMH's Help for Mental Illnesses page or search online for “mental health providers,” “social services,” “hotlines,” or “physicians” for phone numbers and addresses. An emergency room doctor can also provide temporary help and can tell you where and how to get further help. To help yourself while in treatment:Caring for yourself and others is especially important when large numbers of people are exposed to traumatic events (such as natural disasters, accidents, and violent acts). For more information, see the Learn More section, below.In the last decade, progress in research on the mental and biological foundations of PTSD has lead scientists to focus on better understanding the underlying causes of why people experience a range of reactions to trauma.Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including PTSD. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Doctors at NIMH are dedicated to mental health research. The studies take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with one of our clinicians. Find NIH-funded studies currently recruiting participants with PTSD by using ClinicalTrials.gov (search: PTSD).To search for a clinical trial near you, you can visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial's purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers to call for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.You can download or order free copies of the following booklets and brochures in English or en Español:Last Revised: February 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About Post-Traumatic Stress DisorderThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuPTSD is a disorder that some people develop after experiencing a shocking, scary, or dangerous event.It is natural to feel afraid during and after a traumatic situation. This fear triggers many split-second changes in the body to respond to danger and help a person avoid danger in the future. This “fight-or-flight” response is a typical reaction meant to protect a person from harm. Nearly everyone will experience a range of reactions after trauma, yet most people will recover from those symptoms naturally. Those who continue to experience problems may be diagnosed with PTSD. People who have PTSD may feel stressed or frightened even when they are no longer in danger.Anyone can develop PTSD at any age. This includes war veterans as well as survivors of physical and sexual assault, abuse, car accidents, disasters, terror attacks, or other serious events. Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some experiences, like the sudden or unexpected death of a loved one, can also cause PTSD.According to the National Center for PTSD, about seven or eight of every 100 people will experience PTSD at some point in their lives. Women are more likely to develop PTSD than men. Some traumas may put an individual at a higher risk and biological factors like genes may make some people more likely to develop PTSD than others.Symptoms usually begin within 3 months of the traumatic incident, but sometimes they begin later. For symptoms to be considered PTSD, they must last more than a month and be severe enough to interfere with functioning in relationships or work. The course of the illness varies from person to person. Some people recover within 6 months, while others have symptoms that last much longer. In some people, the condition becomes chronic (ongoing).A doctor who has experience helping people with mental illnesses, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist, can diagnose PTSD.To be diagnosed with PTSD, an adult must have all of the following for at least 1 month:Re-experiencing symptoms may cause problems in a person’s everyday routine. They can start from the person’s own thoughts and feelings. Words, objects, or situations that are reminders of the event can also trigger re-experiencing symptoms.Things or situations that remind a person of the traumatic event can trigger avoidance symptoms. These symptoms may cause a person to change his or her personal routine. For example, after a bad car accident, a person who usually drives may avoid driving or riding in a car.Arousal symptoms are usually constant, instead of being triggered by something that brings back memories of the traumatic event. They can make the person feel stressed and angry. These symptoms may make it hard to do daily tasks, such as sleeping, eating, or concentrating.Cognition and mood symptoms can begin or worsen after the traumatic event. These symptoms can make the person feel alienated or detached from friends or family members.After a dangerous event, it’s natural to have some of the symptoms mentioned on previous pages. Sometimes people have very serious symptoms that go away after a few weeks. This is called acute stress disorder, or ASD. When the symptoms last more than a month, seriously affect a person’s ability to function and are not due to substance use, medical illness, or anything except the event itself, the person might be experiencing PTSD. Some people with PTSD don’t show any symptoms for weeks or months. PTSD is often accompanied by depression, substance abuse, or one or more anxiety disorders.Children and teens can have extreme reactions to trauma, but their symptoms may not be the same as adults. In very young children (less than 6 years of age), these symptoms can include:Older children and teens usually show symptoms more like those seen in adults. They may also develop disruptive, disrespectful, or destructive behaviors. Older children and teens may feel guilty for not preventing injury or deaths. They may also have thoughts of revenge. For more information, see the NIMH booklet series, “Helping Children and Adolescents Cope with Violence and Disasters.” These are available on the NIMH website, www.nimh.nih.gov.It is important to remember that not everyone who lives through a dangerous event develops PTSD. In fact, most will recover quickly without intervention.Many factors play a part in whether a person will develop PTSD. Some of these are risk factors that make a person more likely to develop PTSD. Other factors, called resilience factors, can help reduce the risk of developing the disorder. Some of these risk and resilience factors are present before the trauma and others become important during and after a traumatic event.Risk factors for PTSD include:Resilience factors that may reduce the risk of PTSD include:Researchers are studying the importance of various risk and resilience factors including genetics and neurobiology. With more research, someday it may be possible to predict who is likely to develop PTSD and to prevent it.It is important for anyone with PTSD to be treated by a mental health professional who is experienced with PTSD. The main treatments are psychotherapy (“talk” therapy), medications, or both. Everyone is different, and PTSD affects people differently, so a treatment that works for one person may not work for another. People with PTSD need to work with a mental health professional to find the best treatment for their symptoms.If someone with PTSD is living through an ongoing trauma, such as being in an abusive relationship, both of the problems need to be addressed. Other ongoing problems can include panic disorder, depression, substance abuse, and feeling suicidal. Research shows that support from family and friends can be an important part of recovery.Psychotherapy is “talk” therapy. There are many types of psychotherapy but all of them involve talking with a mental health professional to treat a mental illness. Psychotherapy can occur one-on-one or in a group and usually lasts 6 to 12 weeks, but can take more time.Many types of psychotherapy can help people with PTSD. Some types target PTSD symptoms while others focus on social, family, or job-related problems. The doctor or therapist may combine different therapies depending on each person’s needs.Effective psychotherapies tend to emphasize a few key components, including education about symptoms, teaching skills to help identify the triggers of symptoms, and skills to manage the symptoms. One type of psychotherapy is called cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT. CBT can include:Other talk therapies teach people helpful ways to react to frightening events that trigger their PTSD symptoms. Based on this general goal, different types of therapy may:The most studied medications for treating PTSD include antidepressants, which may help control PTSD symptoms such as sadness, worry, anger, and feeling numb inside. Antidepressants and other medications may be prescribed along with psychotherapy. Other medications may be helpful for specific PTSD symptoms. For example, although it is not currently FDA-approved, research has shown that Prazosin may be helpful with sleep problems, particularly nightmares, commonly experienced by people with PTSD.Doctors and patients can work together to find the best medication or medication combination, as well as the right dose. Check the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website (http://www.fda.gov/) for the latest information on patient medication guides, warnings, or newly approved medications.If you know someone who may be experiencing PTSD, the first and most important thing you can do is to help him or her get the right diagnosis and treatment. You may need to help the person make an appointment and then visit the doctor together. Encourage the person to stay in treatment, or to seek different treatment if symptoms don’t get better after six to eight weeks.To help a friend or relative, you can:Never ignore comments about death or wanting to die. Contact your friend’s or relative’s therapist or doctor for help or call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline (1-800-273-8255) or 911 in an emergency.There are other types of treatment that can help as well. People with PTSD should talk about all treatment options with their mental health professional. Treatment should provide people with the skills to manage their symptoms and help them participate in activities that they enjoyed before developing PTSD.It may be very hard to take that first step to help yourself. It is important to realize that although it may take some time, with treatment, you can get better.To help yourself:If you are unsure of where to go for help, ask your family doctor, visit NIMH’s Help for Mental Illnesses page (www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp), or contact someone from one of the groups listed below:If you are thinking about harming yourself, or know someone who is, get help immediately:In the last decade, researchers have focused on understanding the mental and biological foundations of PTSD. They have also been looking at why people experience a range of reactions to trauma. NIMH-funded researchers are working:As gene research and brain imaging technologies continue to improve, reseachers are more likely to be able to pinpoint when and where in the brain PTSD begins. This understanding may then lead to better targeted treatments to suit each person’s own needs or even prevent the disorder before it causes harm.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to use these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1–866–615–6464 or e-mail nimhinfo@nih.gov.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, visit www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service (www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/) has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press and Dissemination Branch  6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892–9663 Phone: 301–443–4513 or 1–866–615–NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301–443–8431 or 1–866–415–8051 toll-free FAX: 301–443–4279 E-mail: nimhinfo@nih.gov  Website: https://www.nimh.nih.govU.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES  National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. QF 16–6388The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuPTSD is a disorder that some people develop after experiencing a shocking, scary, or dangerous event.It is natural to feel afraid during and after a traumatic situation. This fear triggers many split-second changes in the body to respond to danger and help a person avoid danger in the future. This “fight-or-flight” response is a typical reaction meant to protect a person from harm. Nearly everyone will experience a range of reactions after trauma, yet most people will recover from those symptoms naturally. Those who continue to experience problems may be diagnosed with PTSD. People who have PTSD may feel stressed or frightened even when they are no longer in danger.Anyone can develop PTSD at any age. This includes war veterans as well as survivors of physical and sexual assault, abuse, car accidents, disasters, terror attacks, or other serious events. Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some experiences, like the sudden or unexpected death of a loved one, can also cause PTSD.According to the National Center for PTSD, about seven or eight of every 100 people will experience PTSD at some point in their lives. Women are more likely to develop PTSD than men. Some traumas may put an individual at a higher risk and biological factors like genes may make some people more likely to develop PTSD than others.Symptoms usually begin within 3 months of the traumatic incident, but sometimes they begin later. For symptoms to be considered PTSD, they must last more than a month and be severe enough to interfere with functioning in relationships or work. The course of the illness varies from person to person. Some people recover within 6 months, while others have symptoms that last much longer. In some people, the condition becomes chronic (ongoing).A doctor who has experience helping people with mental illnesses, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist, can diagnose PTSD.To be diagnosed with PTSD, an adult must have all of the following for at least 1 month:Re-experiencing symptoms may cause problems in a person’s everyday routine. They can start from the person’s own thoughts and feelings. Words, objects, or situations that are reminders of the event can also trigger re-experiencing symptoms.Things or situations that remind a person of the traumatic event can trigger avoidance symptoms. These symptoms may cause a person to change his or her personal routine. For example, after a bad car accident, a person who usually drives may avoid driving or riding in a car.Arousal symptoms are usually constant, instead of being triggered by something that brings back memories of the traumatic event. They can make the person feel stressed and angry. These symptoms may make it hard to do daily tasks, such as sleeping, eating, or concentrating.Cognition and mood symptoms can begin or worsen after the traumatic event. These symptoms can make the person feel alienated or detached from friends or family members.After a dangerous event, it’s natural to have some of the symptoms mentioned on previous pages. Sometimes people have very serious symptoms that go away after a few weeks. This is called acute stress disorder, or ASD. When the symptoms last more than a month, seriously affect a person’s ability to function and are not due to substance use, medical illness, or anything except the event itself, the person might be experiencing PTSD. Some people with PTSD don’t show any symptoms for weeks or months. PTSD is often accompanied by depression, substance abuse, or one or more anxiety disorders.Children and teens can have extreme reactions to trauma, but their symptoms may not be the same as adults. In very young children (less than 6 years of age), these symptoms can include:Older children and teens usually show symptoms more like those seen in adults. They may also develop disruptive, disrespectful, or destructive behaviors. Older children and teens may feel guilty for not preventing injury or deaths. They may also have thoughts of revenge. For more information, see the NIMH booklet series, “Helping Children and Adolescents Cope with Violence and Disasters.” These are available on the NIMH website, www.nimh.nih.gov.It is important to remember that not everyone who lives through a dangerous event develops PTSD. In fact, most will recover quickly without intervention.Many factors play a part in whether a person will develop PTSD. Some of these are risk factors that make a person more likely to develop PTSD. Other factors, called resilience factors, can help reduce the risk of developing the disorder. Some of these risk and resilience factors are present before the trauma and others become important during and after a traumatic event.Risk factors for PTSD include:Resilience factors that may reduce the risk of PTSD include:Researchers are studying the importance of various risk and resilience factors including genetics and neurobiology. With more research, someday it may be possible to predict who is likely to develop PTSD and to prevent it.It is important for anyone with PTSD to be treated by a mental health professional who is experienced with PTSD. The main treatments are psychotherapy (“talk” therapy), medications, or both. Everyone is different, and PTSD affects people differently, so a treatment that works for one person may not work for another. People with PTSD need to work with a mental health professional to find the best treatment for their symptoms.If someone with PTSD is living through an ongoing trauma, such as being in an abusive relationship, both of the problems need to be addressed. Other ongoing problems can include panic disorder, depression, substance abuse, and feeling suicidal. Research shows that support from family and friends can be an important part of recovery.Psychotherapy is “talk” therapy. There are many types of psychotherapy but all of them involve talking with a mental health professional to treat a mental illness. Psychotherapy can occur one-on-one or in a group and usually lasts 6 to 12 weeks, but can take more time.Many types of psychotherapy can help people with PTSD. Some types target PTSD symptoms while others focus on social, family, or job-related problems. The doctor or therapist may combine different therapies depending on each person’s needs.Effective psychotherapies tend to emphasize a few key components, including education about symptoms, teaching skills to help identify the triggers of symptoms, and skills to manage the symptoms. One type of psychotherapy is called cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT. CBT can include:Other talk therapies teach people helpful ways to react to frightening events that trigger their PTSD symptoms. Based on this general goal, different types of therapy may:The most studied medications for treating PTSD include antidepressants, which may help control PTSD symptoms such as sadness, worry, anger, and feeling numb inside. Antidepressants and other medications may be prescribed along with psychotherapy. Other medications may be helpful for specific PTSD symptoms. For example, although it is not currently FDA-approved, research has shown that Prazosin may be helpful with sleep problems, particularly nightmares, commonly experienced by people with PTSD.Doctors and patients can work together to find the best medication or medication combination, as well as the right dose. Check the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website (http://www.fda.gov/) for the latest information on patient medication guides, warnings, or newly approved medications.If you know someone who may be experiencing PTSD, the first and most important thing you can do is to help him or her get the right diagnosis and treatment. You may need to help the person make an appointment and then visit the doctor together. Encourage the person to stay in treatment, or to seek different treatment if symptoms don’t get better after six to eight weeks.To help a friend or relative, you can:Never ignore comments about death or wanting to die. Contact your friend’s or relative’s therapist or doctor for help or call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline (1-800-273-8255) or 911 in an emergency.There are other types of treatment that can help as well. People with PTSD should talk about all treatment options with their mental health professional. Treatment should provide people with the skills to manage their symptoms and help them participate in activities that they enjoyed before developing PTSD.It may be very hard to take that first step to help yourself. It is important to realize that although it may take some time, with treatment, you can get better.To help yourself:If you are unsure of where to go for help, ask your family doctor, visit NIMH’s Help for Mental Illnesses page (www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp), or contact someone from one of the groups listed below:If you are thinking about harming yourself, or know someone who is, get help immediately:In the last decade, researchers have focused on understanding the mental and biological foundations of PTSD. They have also been looking at why people experience a range of reactions to trauma. NIMH-funded researchers are working:As gene research and brain imaging technologies continue to improve, reseachers are more likely to be able to pinpoint when and where in the brain PTSD begins. This understanding may then lead to better targeted treatments to suit each person’s own needs or even prevent the disorder before it causes harm.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to use these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1–866–615–6464 or e-mail nimhinfo@nih.gov.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, visit www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service (www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/) has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press and Dissemination Branch  6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892–9663 Phone: 301–443–4513 or 1–866–615–NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301–443–8431 or 1–866–415–8051 toll-free FAX: 301–443–4279 E-mail: nimhinfo@nih.gov  Website: https://www.nimh.nih.govU.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES  National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. QF 16–6388The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuPTSD is a disorder that some people develop after experiencing a shocking, scary, or dangerous event.It is natural to feel afraid during and after a traumatic situation. This fear triggers many split-second changes in the body to respond to danger and help a person avoid danger in the future. This “fight-or-flight” response is a typical reaction meant to protect a person from harm. Nearly everyone will experience a range of reactions after trauma, yet most people will recover from those symptoms naturally. Those who continue to experience problems may be diagnosed with PTSD. People who have PTSD may feel stressed or frightened even when they are no longer in danger.Anyone can develop PTSD at any age. This includes war veterans as well as survivors of physical and sexual assault, abuse, car accidents, disasters, terror attacks, or other serious events. Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some experiences, like the sudden or unexpected death of a loved one, can also cause PTSD.According to the National Center for PTSD, about seven or eight of every 100 people will experience PTSD at some point in their lives. Women are more likely to develop PTSD than men. Some traumas may put an individual at a higher risk and biological factors like genes may make some people more likely to develop PTSD than others.Symptoms usually begin within 3 months of the traumatic incident, but sometimes they begin later. For symptoms to be considered PTSD, they must last more than a month and be severe enough to interfere with functioning in relationships or work. The course of the illness varies from person to person. Some people recover within 6 months, while others have symptoms that last much longer. In some people, the condition becomes chronic (ongoing).A doctor who has experience helping people with mental illnesses, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist, can diagnose PTSD.To be diagnosed with PTSD, an adult must have all of the following for at least 1 month:Re-experiencing symptoms may cause problems in a person’s everyday routine. They can start from the person’s own thoughts and feelings. Words, objects, or situations that are reminders of the event can also trigger re-experiencing symptoms.Things or situations that remind a person of the traumatic event can trigger avoidance symptoms. These symptoms may cause a person to change his or her personal routine. For example, after a bad car accident, a person who usually drives may avoid driving or riding in a car.Arousal symptoms are usually constant, instead of being triggered by something that brings back memories of the traumatic event. They can make the person feel stressed and angry. These symptoms may make it hard to do daily tasks, such as sleeping, eating, or concentrating.Cognition and mood symptoms can begin or worsen after the traumatic event. These symptoms can make the person feel alienated or detached from friends or family members.After a dangerous event, it’s natural to have some of the symptoms mentioned on previous pages. Sometimes people have very serious symptoms that go away after a few weeks. This is called acute stress disorder, or ASD. When the symptoms last more than a month, seriously affect a person’s ability to function and are not due to substance use, medical illness, or anything except the event itself, the person might be experiencing PTSD. Some people with PTSD don’t show any symptoms for weeks or months. PTSD is often accompanied by depression, substance abuse, or one or more anxiety disorders.Children and teens can have extreme reactions to trauma, but their symptoms may not be the same as adults. In very young children (less than 6 years of age), these symptoms can include:Older children and teens usually show symptoms more like those seen in adults. They may also develop disruptive, disrespectful, or destructive behaviors. Older children and teens may feel guilty for not preventing injury or deaths. They may also have thoughts of revenge. For more information, see the NIMH booklet series, “Helping Children and Adolescents Cope with Violence and Disasters.” These are available on the NIMH website, www.nimh.nih.gov.It is important to remember that not everyone who lives through a dangerous event develops PTSD. In fact, most will recover quickly without intervention.Many factors play a part in whether a person will develop PTSD. Some of these are risk factors that make a person more likely to develop PTSD. Other factors, called resilience factors, can help reduce the risk of developing the disorder. Some of these risk and resilience factors are present before the trauma and others become important during and after a traumatic event.Risk factors for PTSD include:Resilience factors that may reduce the risk of PTSD include:Researchers are studying the importance of various risk and resilience factors including genetics and neurobiology. With more research, someday it may be possible to predict who is likely to develop PTSD and to prevent it.It is important for anyone with PTSD to be treated by a mental health professional who is experienced with PTSD. The main treatments are psychotherapy (“talk” therapy), medications, or both. Everyone is different, and PTSD affects people differently, so a treatment that works for one person may not work for another. People with PTSD need to work with a mental health professional to find the best treatment for their symptoms.If someone with PTSD is living through an ongoing trauma, such as being in an abusive relationship, both of the problems need to be addressed. Other ongoing problems can include panic disorder, depression, substance abuse, and feeling suicidal. Research shows that support from family and friends can be an important part of recovery.Psychotherapy is “talk” therapy. There are many types of psychotherapy but all of them involve talking with a mental health professional to treat a mental illness. Psychotherapy can occur one-on-one or in a group and usually lasts 6 to 12 weeks, but can take more time.Many types of psychotherapy can help people with PTSD. Some types target PTSD symptoms while others focus on social, family, or job-related problems. The doctor or therapist may combine different therapies depending on each person’s needs.Effective psychotherapies tend to emphasize a few key components, including education about symptoms, teaching skills to help identify the triggers of symptoms, and skills to manage the symptoms. One type of psychotherapy is called cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT. CBT can include:Other talk therapies teach people helpful ways to react to frightening events that trigger their PTSD symptoms. Based on this general goal, different types of therapy may:The most studied medications for treating PTSD include antidepressants, which may help control PTSD symptoms such as sadness, worry, anger, and feeling numb inside. Antidepressants and other medications may be prescribed along with psychotherapy. Other medications may be helpful for specific PTSD symptoms. For example, although it is not currently FDA-approved, research has shown that Prazosin may be helpful with sleep problems, particularly nightmares, commonly experienced by people with PTSD.Doctors and patients can work together to find the best medication or medication combination, as well as the right dose. Check the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website (http://www.fda.gov/) for the latest information on patient medication guides, warnings, or newly approved medications.If you know someone who may be experiencing PTSD, the first and most important thing you can do is to help him or her get the right diagnosis and treatment. You may need to help the person make an appointment and then visit the doctor together. Encourage the person to stay in treatment, or to seek different treatment if symptoms don’t get better after six to eight weeks.To help a friend or relative, you can:Never ignore comments about death or wanting to die. Contact your friend’s or relative’s therapist or doctor for help or call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline (1-800-273-8255) or 911 in an emergency.There are other types of treatment that can help as well. People with PTSD should talk about all treatment options with their mental health professional. Treatment should provide people with the skills to manage their symptoms and help them participate in activities that they enjoyed before developing PTSD.It may be very hard to take that first step to help yourself. It is important to realize that although it may take some time, with treatment, you can get better.To help yourself:If you are unsure of where to go for help, ask your family doctor, visit NIMH’s Help for Mental Illnesses page (www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp), or contact someone from one of the groups listed below:If you are thinking about harming yourself, or know someone who is, get help immediately:In the last decade, researchers have focused on understanding the mental and biological foundations of PTSD. They have also been looking at why people experience a range of reactions to trauma. NIMH-funded researchers are working:As gene research and brain imaging technologies continue to improve, reseachers are more likely to be able to pinpoint when and where in the brain PTSD begins. This understanding may then lead to better targeted treatments to suit each person’s own needs or even prevent the disorder before it causes harm.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to use these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1–866–615–6464 or e-mail nimhinfo@nih.gov.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, visit www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service (www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/) has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press and Dissemination Branch  6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892–9663 Phone: 301–443–4513 or 1–866–615–NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301–443–8431 or 1–866–415–8051 toll-free FAX: 301–443–4279 E-mail: nimhinfo@nih.gov  Website: https://www.nimh.nih.govU.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES  National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. QF 16–6388The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuWith postpartum depression, feelings of sadness and anxiety can be extreme and might interfere with a woman’s ability to care for herself or her family.Postpartum depression is a mood disorder that can affect women after childbirth. Mothers with postpartum depression experience feelings of extreme sadness, anxiety, and exhaustion that may make it difficult for them to complete daily care activities for themselves or for others.Postpartum depression does not have a single cause, but likely results from a combination of physical and emotional factors. Postpartum depression does not occur because of something a mother does or does not do.After childbirth, the levels of hormones (estrogen and progesterone) in a woman’s body quickly drop. This leads to chemical changes in her brain that may trigger mood swings. In addition, many mothers are unable to get the rest they need to fully recover from giving birth. Constant sleep deprivation can lead to physical discomfort and exhaustion, which can contribute to the symptoms of postpartum depression.Some of the more common symptoms a woman may experience include:Only a health care provider can diagnose a woman with postpartum depression. Because symptoms of this condition are broad and may vary between women, a health care provider can help a woman figure out whether the symptoms she is feeling are due to postpartum depression or something else. A woman who experiences any of these symptoms should see a health care provider right away.The “baby blues” is a term used to describe the feelings of worry, unhappiness, and fatigue that many women experience after having a baby. Babies require a lot of care, so it’s normal for mothers to be worried about, or tired from, providing that care. Baby blues, which affects up to 80 percent of mothers, includes feelings that are somewhat mild, last a week or two, and go away on their own.With postpartum depression, feelings of sadness and anxiety can be extreme and might interfere with a woman’s ability to care for herself or her family. Because of the severity of the symptoms, postpartum depression usually requires treatment. The condition, which occurs in nearly 15 percent of births, may begin shortly before or any time after childbirth, but commonly begins between a week and a month after delivery.Some women are at greater risk for developing postpartum depression because they have one or more risk factors, such as:Postpartum depression can affect any woman regardless of age, race, ethnicity, or economic status.There are effective treatments for postpartum depression. A woman’s health care provider can help her choose the best treatment, which may include:These treatment methods can be used alone or together.Without treatment, postpartum depression can last for months or years. In addition to affecting the mother’s health, it can interfere with her ability to connect with and care for her baby and may cause the baby to have problems with sleeping, eating, and behavior as he or she grows.Family members and friends may be the first to recognize symptoms of postpartum depression in a new mother. They can encourage her to talk with a health care provider, offer emotional support, and assist with daily tasks such as caring for the baby or the home.If you or someone you know is in crisis or thinking of suicide, get help quickly.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, go to MentalHealth.gov at http://www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at http://www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892–9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 or 1-866-415-8051 toll-free Fax: 301-443-4279 Email: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: http://www.nimh.nih.govU.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. 13-8000The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuAre you extremely afraid of being judged by others?Are you very self-conscious in everyday social situations?Do you avoid meeting new people?If you have been feeling this way for at least six months and these feelings make it hard for you to do everyday tasks—such as talking to people at work or school—you may have a social anxiety disorder.Social anxiety disorder (also called social phobia) is a mental health condition. It is an intense, persistent fear of being watched and judged by others. This fear can affect work, school, and your other day-to-day activities. It can even make it hard to make and keep friends. But social anxiety disorder doesn’t have to stop you from reaching your potential. Treatment can help you overcome your symptoms.“In school, I was always afraid of being called on, even when I knew the answers. I didn’t want people to think I was stupid or boring. My heart would pound and I would feel dizzy and sick. When I got a job, I hated to meet with my boss or talk in a meeting. I couldn’t attend my best friend’s wedding reception because I was afraid of having to meet new people. I tried to calm myself by drinking several glasses of wine before an event and then I started drinking every day to try to face what I had to do.”“I finally talked to my doctor because I was tired of feeling this way and I was worried that I would lose my job. I now take medicine and meet with a counselor to talk about ways to cope with my fears. I refuse to use alcohol to escape my fears and I’m on my way to feeling better.”Social anxiety disorder is a common type of anxiety disorder. A person with social anxiety disorder feels symptoms of anxiety or fear in certain or all social situations, such as meeting new people, dating, being on a job interview, answering a question in class, or having to talk to a cashier in a store. Doing everyday things in front of people—such as eating or drinking in front of others or using a public restroom—also causes anxiety or fear. The person is afraid that he or she will be humiliated, judged, and rejected.The fear that people with social anxiety disorder have in social situations is so strong that they feel it is beyond their ability to control. As a result, it gets in the way of going to work, attending school, or doing everyday things. People with social anxiety disorder may worry about these and other things for weeks before they happen. Sometimes, they end up staying away from places or events where they think they might have to do something that will embarrass them.Some people with the disorder do not have anxiety in social situations but have performance anxiety instead. They feel physical symptoms of anxiety in situations such as giving a speech, playing a sports game, or dancing or playing a musical instrument on stage.Social anxiety disorder usually starts during youth in people who are extremely shy. Social anxiety disorder is not uncommon; research suggests that about 7 percent of Americans are affected. Without treatment, social anxiety disorder can last for many years or a lifetime and prevent a person from reaching his or her full potential.When having to perform in front of or be around others, people with social anxiety disorder tend to:Social anxiety disorder sometimes runs in families, but no one knows for sure why some family members have it while others don’t. Researchers have found that several parts of the brain are involved in fear and anxiety. Some researchers think that misreading of others’ behavior may play a role in causing or worsening social anxiety. For example, you may think that people are staring or frowning at you when they truly are not. Underdeveloped social skills are another possible contributor to social anxiety. For example, if you have underdeveloped social skills, you may feel discouraged after talking with people and may worry about doing it in the future. By learning more about fear and anxiety in the brain, scientists may be able to create better treatments. Researchers are also looking for ways in which stress and environmental factors may play a role.First, talk to your doctor or health care professional about your symptoms. Your doctor should do an exam and ask you about your health history to make sure that an unrelated physical problem is not causing your symptoms. Your doctor may refer you to a mental health specialist, such as a psychiatrist, psychologist, clinical social worker, or counselor. The first step to effective treatment is to have a diagnosis made, usually by a mental health specialist.Social anxiety disorder is generally treated with psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk” therapy), medication, or both. Speak with your doctor or health care provider about the best treatment for you. If your health care provider cannot provide a referral, visit the NIMH Help for Mental Illnesses web page at www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp for resources you may find helpful.A type of psychotherapy called cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is especially useful for treating social anxiety disorder. CBT teaches you different ways of thinking, behaving, and reacting to situations that help you feel less anxious and fearful. It can also help you learn and practice social skills. CBT delivered in a group format can be especially helpful. For more information on psychotherapy, please visit www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/psychotherapies.Many people with social anxiety also find support groups helpful. In a group of people who all have social anxiety disorder, you can receive unbiased, honest feedback about how others in the group see you. This way, you can learn that your thoughts about judgment and rejection are not true or are distorted. You can also learn how others with social anxiety disorder approach and overcome the fear of social situations.There are three types of medications used to help treat social anxiety disorder:Anti-anxiety medications are powerful and begin working right away to reduce anxious feelings; however, these medications are usually not taken for long periods of time. People can build up a tolerance if they are taken over a long period of time and may need higher and higher doses to get the same effect. Some people may even become dependent on them. To avoid these problems, doctors usually prescribe anti-anxiety medications for short periods, a practice that is especially helpful for older adults.Antidepressants are mainly used to treat depression, but are also helpful for the symptoms of social anxiety disorder. In contrast to anti-anxiety medications, they may take several weeks to start working. Antidepressants may also cause side effects, such as headaches, nausea, or difficulty sleeping. These side effects are usually not severe for most people, especially if the dose starts off low and is increased slowly over time. Talk to your doctor about any side effects that you have.Beta-blockers are medicines that can help block some of the physical symptoms of anxiety on the body, such as an increased heart rate, sweating, or tremors. Beta-blockers are commonly the medications of choice for the “performance anxiety” type of social anxiety.Your doctor will work with you to find the best medication, dose, and duration of treatment. Many people with social anxiety disorder obtain the best results with a combination of medication and CBT or other psychotherapies.Don't give up on treatment too quickly. Both psychotherapy and medication can take some time to work. A healthy lifestyle can also help combat anxiety. Make sure to get enough sleep and exercise, eat a healthy diet, and turn to family and friends who you trust for support.For basic information about these and other mental health medications, visit www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/mental-health-medications. Visit the Food and Drug Administration’s website (www.fda.gov/) for the latest information on warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.To learn more about social anxiety disorder, visit:Medline Plus (National Library of Medicine) http://medlineplus.gov/ (En Espanol: http://medlineplus.gov/spanish)For information on clinical trials, visit: ClinicalTrials.gov: https://clinicaltrials.gov (En Espanol: http://salud.nih.gov/investigacion-clinica/))For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, visit the NIMH website (www.nimh.nih.gov).The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) provides this online resource for locating mental health treatment facilities and programs. The Mental Health Treatment Locator section of the Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator lists facilities providing mental health services to persons with mental illness. Find a facility in your state at www.findtreatment.samhsa.gov/. For additional resources, visit www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp.This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to use these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1–866–615–6464 or e-mail nimhinfo@nih.gov.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press and Dissemination Branch  6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892–9663 Phone: 301–443–4513 or 1–866–615–NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301–443–8431 or 1–866–415–8051 toll-free FAX: 301–443–4279 E-mail: nimhinfo@nih.gov  Website: www.nimh.nih.govU.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES  National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. QF 16–4678The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuEveryone feels stressed from time to time. But what is stress? How does it affect your health? And what can you do about it?Stress is how the brain and body respond to any demand. Every type of demand or stressor—such as exercise, work, school, major life changes, or traumatic events—can be stressful.Stress can affect your health. It is important to pay attention to how you deal with minor and major stress events so that you know when to seek help.Here are five things you should know about stress:Everyone feels stressed from time to time. Some people may cope with stress more effectively or recover from stressful events more quickly than others. There are different types of stress—all of which carry physical and mental health risks. A stressor may be a one time or short term occurrence, or it can be an occurrence that keeps happening over a long period of time.Examples of stress include:Stress can motivate people to prepare or perform, like when they need to take a test or interview for a new job. Stress can even be life-saving in some situations. In response to danger, your body prepares to face a threat or flee to safety. In these situations, your pulse quickens, you breathe faster, your muscles tense, your brain uses more oxygen and increases activity—all functions aimed at survival.Health problems can occur if the stress response goes on for too long or becomes chronic, such as when the source of stress is constant, or if the response continues after the danger has subsided. With chronic stress, those same life-saving responses in your body can suppress immune, digestive, sleep, and reproductive systems, which may cause them to stop working normally.Different people may feel stress in different ways. For example, some people experience mainly digestive symptoms, while others may have headaches, sleeplessness, sadness, anger or irritability. People under chronic stress are prone to more frequent and severe viral infections, such as the flu or common cold.Routine stress may be the hardest type of stress to notice at first. Because the source of stress tends to be more constant than in cases of acute or traumatic stress, the body gets no clear signal to return to normal functioning. Over time, continued strain on your body from routine stress may contribute to serious health problems, such as heart disease, high blood pressure, diabetes, and other illnesses, as well as mental disorders like depression or anxiety.The effects of stress tend to build up over time. Taking practical steps to manage your stress can reduce or prevent these effects. The following are some tips that may help you to cope with stress:You should seek help right away if you have suicidal thoughts, are overwhelmed, feel you cannot cope, or are using drugs or alcohol to cope. Your doctor may be able to provide a recommendation. You can find resources to help you find a mental health provider by visiting www.nimh.nih.gov/findhelp.Anyone experiencing severe or long-term, unrelenting stress can become overwhelmed. If you or a loved one is having thoughts of suicide, call the toll-free National Suicide Prevention Lifeline (suicidepreventionlifeline.org) at 1-800-273-TALK (8255), available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The service is available to anyone. All calls are confidential.For more information on conditions that affect mental health, resources, and research, visit www.mentalhealth.gov, or the NIMH website at www.nimh.nih.gov. In addition, the National Library of Medicine’s MedlinePlus  service has information on a wide variety of health topics, including conditions that affect mental health.National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301-443-4513 or 1-866-615-NIMH (6464) toll-free TTY: 301-443-8431 TTY: 866-415-8051 toll-free FAX: 301-443-4279 E-mail: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: www.nimh.nih.gov  NIH Publication No. OM 16-4310The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuBeing a teenager can be tough. There are changes taking place in your body and brain that can affect how you learn, think, and behave. And if you are facing tough or stressful situations, it is normal to have emotional ups and downs.But if you have been overwhelmingly sad for a long time (a few weeks to months) and you’re not able to concentrate or do the things you usually enjoy, you may want to talk to a trusted adult about depression.Depression (major depressive disorder) is a medical illness that can interfere with your ability to handle your daily activities, such as sleeping, eating, or managing your school work. Depression is common but that doesn’t mean it isn’t serious. Treatment may be needed for someone to feel better. Depression can happen at any age, but often symptoms begin in the teens or early 20s or 30s. It can occur along with other mental disorders, substance abuse, and other health conditions.Well-meaning friends or family members may try to tell someone with depression to “snap out of it,” “just be positive,” or “you can be happier if you just try harder.” But depression is not a sign of weakness or a character flaw. Most people with depression need treatment to get better.Sadness is something we all experience. It is a normal reaction to a loss or a setback, but it usually passes with a little time. Depression is different.If you are wondering if you may have depression, ask yourself these questions:What Should I Do If I am Considering Suicide or Harming Myself?If you are in crisis and need help, call this toll-free number for the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline (NSPL), available 24 hours a day, every day: 1-800-273-TALK (8255). The service is available to everyone. The deaf and hard of hearing can contact the Lifeline via TTY at 1-800-799-4889. All calls are confidential. You can also visit the Lifeline’s website at www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org.The Crisis Text Line is another free, confidential resource available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Text “HOME” to 741741 and a trained crisis counselor will respond to you with support and information over text message. Visit www.crisistextline.org.Not everyone with depression experiences every symptom. Some people experience only a few symptoms. Others may have many. The symptoms and how long they last will vary from person to person.Depression is usually treated with psychotherapy, medication, or a combination of the two.Psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk therapy”) is a term for treatment techniques that can help you identify and manage troubling emotions, thoughts, and behavior. Psychotherapy can take place in a one-on-one meeting with you and a licensed mental health professional. Sometimes you might be part of a group guided by a mental health professional.Read more about psychotherapy at www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/psychotherapies.If your doctor thinks you need medicine to treat your depression, he or she might prescribe an antidepressant.When you are taking an antidepressant, it is important to carefully follow your doctor’s directions for taking your medicine. The medication could take up to six weeks to work and you should not stop taking it without the help of a doctor. You should also avoid using alcohol or drugs that have not been prescribed to you so that your medications can work.When it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease the dose so that your body can adjust. If you stop taking the medication too soon, your depression symptoms may return. Another reason to stop medication gradually is that stopping suddenly can cause withdrawal symptoms like anxiety and irritability.Antidepressants can have side effects. These side effects are usually mild (possible stomach upsets or headaches) and may go away on their own. But talk to your doctor about any side effects that you experience because your doctor might adjust the dose or change the medicine. For more information about side effects, visit www.fda.gov.Although antidepressants can be effective, they may present serious risks to some, especially children and teens. Anyone taking antidepressants should be monitored closely, especially when they first start taking them. Severe anxiety or agitation early in treatment can be especially distressing and should be reported to the doctor immediately.For many people, the risks of untreated depression outweigh the side effects of antidepressant medications when they are used under a doctor’s careful supervision. Information about medications changes frequently. Talk to your doctor and visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (www.fda.gov) for the latest safety information.Be patient and know that treatment takes time to work. In the meantime, you can:If you think your friend might have depression, first help him or her talk to a trusted adult who can connect your friend to a health professional. You can also:Often, family and friends are the first to recognize the warning signs of suicide and can take the first step toward helping the person find help.Remember:You can also call 1-800-273-TALK (8255), the toll-free number for the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline (NSPL), which is available 24 hours a day, every day. The service is available to everyone. All calls are free and confidential. You can also chat with the NSPL online (http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org).The Crisis Text Line is another free, confidential resource available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Text “HOME” to 741741 and a trained crisis counselor will respond to you with support and information via text message. Visit https://www.crisistextline.org.If you see messages or live streaming suicidal behavior on social media, call 911 immediately, contact the toll-free National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (8255), or text the Crisis Text Line (text HOME to 741741).Some social media sites also have a process to report suicidal content and get help for the person posting the message. Each offers different options on how to respond if you see concerning posts about suicide. For example:Because help via these processes may be delayed, it is still important to call 911 if someone is posting suicidal messages or something disturbing on social media. People—even strangers—have saved lives by being vigilant.For more information on depression and suicide prevention, visit the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) website (www.nimh.nih.gov).This publication is in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from NIMH. Citation of NIMH as a source is appreciated. We encourage you to reproduce it and use it in your efforts to improve public health. However, using government materials inappropriately can raise legal or ethical concerns, so we ask you to use these guidelines:If you have questions regarding these guidelines and use of NIMH publications, please contact the NIMH Information Resource Center at 1–866–615–6464 or e-mail at nimhinfo@nih.gov. National Institute of Mental Health Office of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications Science Writing, Press, and Dissemination Branch 6001 Executive Boulevard Room 6200, MSC 9663 Bethesda, MD 20892-9663 Phone: 301–443–4513 or Toll-free: 1–866–615–NIMH (6464) TTY Toll-free: 1–866–415–8051 Fax: 301–443–4279 E-mail: nimhinfo@nih.gov Website: www.nimh.nih.gov  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health NIH Publication No. OM 18-4302The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuThe wide variety of anxiety disorders differ by the objects or situations that induce them, but share features of excessive anxiety and related behavioral disturbances. Anxiety disorders can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, school work, and relationships.For the data presented on this page, any anxiety disorders included panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, agoraphobia, specific phobia, social anxiety disorder (social phobia), post-traumatic stress disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and separation anxiety disorder.Additional information about anxiety disorders can be found on the NIMH Health Topics page on Anxiety Disorders.Diagnostic Assessment and Population:Survey Non-response:Diagnostic Assessment and Population:Survey Non-response:Last Updated: November 2017The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuBipolar disorder, sometimes referred to as manic-depressive disorder, is characterized by dramatic shifts in mood, energy, and activity levels that affect a person’s ability to carry out day-to-day tasks. These shifts in mood and energy levels are more severe than the normal ups and downs that are experienced by everyone.Additional information about bipolar disorder can be found on the NIMH Health Topics page on Bipolar Disorder.Diagnostic Assessment and Population:Survey Non-response:Diagnostic Assessment and Population:Survey Non-response:Last Updated: November 2017The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuPost-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) can develop after exposure to a potentially traumatic event that is beyond a typical stressor. Events that may lead to PTSD include, but are not limited to, violent personal assaults, natural or human-caused disasters, accidents, combat, and other forms of violence. Exposure to events like these is common. About one half of all U.S. adults will experience at least one traumatic event in their lives, but most do not develop PTSD. People who experience PTSD may have persistent, frightening thoughts and memories of the event(s), experience sleep problems, feel detached or numb, or may be easily startled. In severe forms, PTSD can significantly impair a person's ability to function at work, at home, and socially.Additional information about PTSD can be found on the NIMH Health Topics page on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder.Diagnostic Assessment and Population:Survey Non-response:Diagnostic Assessment and Population:Survey Non-response:Last Updated: November 2017The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuAnxiety is a normal reaction to stress and can actually be beneficial in some situations. For some people, however, anxiety can become excessive, and while the person suffering may realize it is excessive they may also have difficulty controlling it and it may negatively affect their day-to-day living. There are a wide variety of anxiety disorders, including post-traumatic stress disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and specific phobias to name a few. Collectively they are among the most common mental disorders experienced by Americans.Additional information about anxiety disorders can be found on NIMH's anxiety disorders page.View/Download PDFThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuSocial anxiety disorder (formerly social phobia) is characterized by persistent fear of one or more social or performance situations in which the person is exposed to unfamiliar people or to possible scrutiny by others. The individual fears that he or she will act in a way (or show anxiety symptoms) that will be embarrassing and humiliating.Additional information about social anxiety disorder can be found on the NIMH Health Topics page on Anxiety Disorders.Diagnostic Assessment and Population:Survey Non-response:Diagnostic Assessment and Population:Survey Non-response:Last Updated: November 2017The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuOccasional anxiety is an expected part of life. You might feel anxious when faced with a problem at work, before taking a test, or before making an important decision. But anxiety disorders involve more than temporary worry or fear. For a person with an anxiety disorder, the anxiety does not go away and can get worse over time. The symptoms can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, school work, and relationships.There are several types of anxiety disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and various phobia-related disorders.People with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) display excessive anxiety or worry, most days for at least 6 months, about a number of things such as personal health, work, social interactions, and everyday routine life circumstances. The fear and anxiety can cause significant problems in areas of their life, such as social interactions, school, and work.Generalized anxiety disorder symptoms include:People with panic disorder have recurrent unexpected panic attacks. Panic attacks are sudden periods of intense fear that come on quickly and reach their peak within minutes. Attacks can occur unexpectedly or can be brought on by a trigger, such as a feared object or situation.During a panic attack, people may experience:People with panic disorder often worry about when the next attack will happen and actively try to prevent future attacks by avoiding places, situations, or behaviors they associate with panic attacks. Worry about panic attacks, and the effort spent trying to avoid attacks, cause significant problems in various areas of the person’s life, including the development of agoraphobia (see below).A phobia is an intense fear of—or aversion to—specific objects or situations. Although it can be realistic to be anxious in some circumstances, the fear people with phobias feel is out of proportion to the actual danger caused by the situation or object.People with a phobia:There are several types of phobias and phobia-related disorders:Specific Phobias (sometimes called simple phobias): As the name suggests, people who have a specific phobia have an intense fear of, or feel intense anxiety about, specific types of objects or situations. Some examples of specific phobias include the fear of:Social anxiety disorder (previously called social phobia): People with social anxiety disorder have a general intense fear of, or anxiety toward, social or performance situations. They worry that actions or behaviors associated with their anxiety will be negatively evaluated by others, leading them to feel embarrassed. This worry often causes people with social anxiety to avoid social situations. Social anxiety disorder can manifest in a range of situations, such as within the workplace or the school environment.Agoraphobia: People with agoraphobia have an intense fear of two or more of the following situations:People with agoraphobia often avoid these situations, in part, because they think being able to leave might be difficult or impossible in the event they have panic-like reactions or other embarrassing symptoms. In the most severe form of agoraphobia, an individual can become housebound.Separation anxiety disorder: Separation anxiety is often thought of as something that only children deal with; however, adults can also be diagnosed with separation anxiety disorder. People who have separation anxiety disorder have fears about being parted from people to whom they are attached. They often worry that some sort of harm or something untoward will happen to their attachment figures while they are separated. This fear leads them to avoid being separated from their attachment figures and to avoid being alone. People with separation anxiety may have nightmares about being separated from attachment figures or experience physical symptoms when separation occurs or is anticipated.Selective mutism: A somewhat rare disorder associated with anxiety is selective mutism. Selective mutism occurs when people fail to speak in specific social situations despite having normal language skills. Selective mutism usually occurs before the age of 5 and is often associated with extreme shyness, fear of social embarrassment, compulsive traits, withdrawal, clinging behavior, and temper tantrums. People diagnosed with selective mutism are often also diagnosed with other anxiety disorders.Researchers are finding that both genetic and environmental factors contribute to the risk of developing an anxiety disorder. Although the risk factors for each type of anxiety disorder can vary, some general risk factors for all types of anxiety disorders include:Anxiety disorders are generally treated with psychotherapy, medication, or both. There are many ways to treat anxiety and people should work with their doctor to choose the treatment that is best for them.Psychotherapy or “talk therapy” can help people with anxiety disorders. To be effective, psychotherapy must be directed at the person’s specific anxieties and tailored to his or her needs.Cognitive Behavioral TherapyCognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) is an example of one type of psychotherapy that can help people with anxiety disorders. It teaches people different ways of thinking, behaving, and reacting to anxiety-producing and fearful objects and situations. CBT can also help people learn and practice social skills, which is vital for treating social anxiety disorder.Cognitive therapy and exposure therapy are two CBT methods that are often used, together or by themselves, to treat social anxiety disorder. Cognitive therapy focuses on identifying, challenging, and then neutralizing unhelpful or distorted thoughts underlying anxiety disorders. Exposure therapy focuses on confronting the fears underlying an anxiety disorder to help people engage in activities they have been avoiding. Exposure therapy is sometimes used along with relaxation exercises and/or imagery.CBT can be conducted individually or with a group of people who have similar difficulties. Often “homework” is assigned for participants to complete between sessions.Medication does not cure anxiety disorders but can help relieve symptoms. Medication for anxiety is prescribed by doctors, such as a psychiatrist or primary care provider. Some states also allow psychologists who have received specialized training to prescribe psychiatric medications. The most common classes of medications used to combat anxiety disorders are anti-anxiety drugs (such as benzodiazepines), antidepressants, and beta-blockers.Anti-Anxiety MedicationsAnti-anxiety medications can help reduce the symptoms of anxiety, panic attacks, or extreme fear and worry. The most common anti-anxiety medications are called benzodiazepines. Although benzodiazepines are sometimes used as first-line treatments for generalized anxiety disorder, they have both benefits and drawbacks.Some benefits of benzodiazepines are that they are effective in relieving anxiety and take effect more quickly than antidepressant medications often prescribed for anxiety. Some drawbacks of benzodiazepines are that people can build up a tolerance to them if they are taken over a long period of time and they may need higher and higher doses to get the same effect. Some people may even become dependent on them.To avoid these problems, doctors usually prescribe benzodiazepines for short periods of time, a practice that is especially helpful for older adults, people who have substance abuse problems, and people who become dependent on medication easily.If people suddenly stop taking benzodiazepines, they may have withdrawal symptoms, or their anxiety may return. Therefore, benzodiazepines should be tapered off slowly. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose.For long-term use, benzodiazepines are often considered a second-line treatment for anxiety (with antidepressants being considered a first-line treatment) as well as an “as-needed” treatment for any distressing flare-ups of symptoms.A different type of anti-anxiety medication is buspirone. Buspirone is a non-benzodiazepine medication specifically indicated for the treatment of chronic anxiety, although it does not help everyone.AntidepressantsAntidepressants are used to treat depression, but they can also be helpful for treating anxiety disorders. They may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. You may need to try several different antidepressant medicines before finding the one that improves your symptoms and has manageable side effects. A medication that has helped you or a close family member in the past will often be considered.Antidepressants can take time to work, so it’s important to give the medication a chance before reaching a conclusion about its effectiveness. If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Antidepressants called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) are commonly used as first-line treatments for anxiety. Less-commonly used — but effective — treatments for anxiety disorders are older classes of antidepressants, such as tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs).Please Note: In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may experience an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressant medications, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. Because of this, patients of all ages taking antidepressants should be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.Beta-BlockersAlthough beta-blockers are most often used to treat high blood pressure, they can also be used to help relieve the physical symptoms of anxiety, such as rapid heartbeat, shaking, trembling, and blushing. These medications, when taken for a short period of time, can help people keep physical symptoms under control. They can also be used “as needed” to reduce acute anxiety, including as a preventive intervention for some predictable forms of performance anxieties.Choosing the Right MedicationSome types of drugs may work better for specific types of anxiety disorders, so people should work closely with their doctor to identify which medication is best for them. Certain substances such as caffeine, some over-the-counter cold medicines, illicit drugs, and herbal supplements may aggravate the symptoms of anxiety disorders or interact with prescribed medication. Patients should talk with their doctor, so they can learn which substances are safe and which to avoid.Choosing the right medication, medication dose, and treatment plan should be done under an expert’s care and should be based on a person’s needs and their medical situation. Your doctor may try several medicines before finding the right one.You and your doctor should discuss:For more information, please visit Mental Health Medications Health Topic webpage. Please note that any information on this website regarding medications is provided for educational purposes only and may be outdated. Diagnosis and treatment decisions should be made in consultation with your doctor. Information about medications changes frequently. Please visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website for the latest information on warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Some people with anxiety disorders might benefit from joining a self-help or support group and sharing their problems and achievements with others. Internet chat rooms might also be useful, but any advice received over the internet should be used with caution, as Internet acquaintances have usually never seen each other and what has helped one person is not necessarily what is best for another. You should always check with your doctor before following any treatment advice found on the internet. Talking with a trusted friend or member of the clergy can also provide support, but it is not necessarily a sufficient alternative to care from a doctor or other health professional.Stress management techniques and meditation can help people with anxiety disorders calm themselves and may enhance the effects of therapy. Research suggests that aerobic exercise can help some people manage their anxiety; however, exercise should not take the place of standard care and more research is needed.Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including anxiety disorders. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, new psychotherapies, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe.Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future. Decisions about whether to apply for a clinical trial and which ones are best suited for a given individual are best made in collaboration with a licensed health professional.To learn more about clinical trials, please visit the NIH Clinical Research Trials and You website. To find a clinical trial, visit ClinicalTrials.gov.Last Revised: July 2018 Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreThis brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).This brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a chronic disorder in which a person has uncontrollable, reoccurring thoughts and behaviors.This brochure discusses symptoms, causes, and treatments for panic disorder, a type of anxiety disorder associated with sudden and repeated attacks of fear.More Publications About Anxiety DisordersThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuOccasional anxiety is an expected part of life. You might feel anxious when faced with a problem at work, before taking a test, or before making an important decision. But anxiety disorders involve more than temporary worry or fear. For a person with an anxiety disorder, the anxiety does not go away and can get worse over time. The symptoms can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, school work, and relationships.There are several types of anxiety disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and various phobia-related disorders.People with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) display excessive anxiety or worry, most days for at least 6 months, about a number of things such as personal health, work, social interactions, and everyday routine life circumstances. The fear and anxiety can cause significant problems in areas of their life, such as social interactions, school, and work.Generalized anxiety disorder symptoms include:People with panic disorder have recurrent unexpected panic attacks. Panic attacks are sudden periods of intense fear that come on quickly and reach their peak within minutes. Attacks can occur unexpectedly or can be brought on by a trigger, such as a feared object or situation.During a panic attack, people may experience:People with panic disorder often worry about when the next attack will happen and actively try to prevent future attacks by avoiding places, situations, or behaviors they associate with panic attacks. Worry about panic attacks, and the effort spent trying to avoid attacks, cause significant problems in various areas of the person’s life, including the development of agoraphobia (see below).A phobia is an intense fear of—or aversion to—specific objects or situations. Although it can be realistic to be anxious in some circumstances, the fear people with phobias feel is out of proportion to the actual danger caused by the situation or object.People with a phobia:There are several types of phobias and phobia-related disorders:Specific Phobias (sometimes called simple phobias): As the name suggests, people who have a specific phobia have an intense fear of, or feel intense anxiety about, specific types of objects or situations. Some examples of specific phobias include the fear of:Social anxiety disorder (previously called social phobia): People with social anxiety disorder have a general intense fear of, or anxiety toward, social or performance situations. They worry that actions or behaviors associated with their anxiety will be negatively evaluated by others, leading them to feel embarrassed. This worry often causes people with social anxiety to avoid social situations. Social anxiety disorder can manifest in a range of situations, such as within the workplace or the school environment.Agoraphobia: People with agoraphobia have an intense fear of two or more of the following situations:People with agoraphobia often avoid these situations, in part, because they think being able to leave might be difficult or impossible in the event they have panic-like reactions or other embarrassing symptoms. In the most severe form of agoraphobia, an individual can become housebound.Separation anxiety disorder: Separation anxiety is often thought of as something that only children deal with; however, adults can also be diagnosed with separation anxiety disorder. People who have separation anxiety disorder have fears about being parted from people to whom they are attached. They often worry that some sort of harm or something untoward will happen to their attachment figures while they are separated. This fear leads them to avoid being separated from their attachment figures and to avoid being alone. People with separation anxiety may have nightmares about being separated from attachment figures or experience physical symptoms when separation occurs or is anticipated.Selective mutism: A somewhat rare disorder associated with anxiety is selective mutism. Selective mutism occurs when people fail to speak in specific social situations despite having normal language skills. Selective mutism usually occurs before the age of 5 and is often associated with extreme shyness, fear of social embarrassment, compulsive traits, withdrawal, clinging behavior, and temper tantrums. People diagnosed with selective mutism are often also diagnosed with other anxiety disorders.Researchers are finding that both genetic and environmental factors contribute to the risk of developing an anxiety disorder. Although the risk factors for each type of anxiety disorder can vary, some general risk factors for all types of anxiety disorders include:Anxiety disorders are generally treated with psychotherapy, medication, or both. There are many ways to treat anxiety and people should work with their doctor to choose the treatment that is best for them.Psychotherapy or “talk therapy” can help people with anxiety disorders. To be effective, psychotherapy must be directed at the person’s specific anxieties and tailored to his or her needs.Cognitive Behavioral TherapyCognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) is an example of one type of psychotherapy that can help people with anxiety disorders. It teaches people different ways of thinking, behaving, and reacting to anxiety-producing and fearful objects and situations. CBT can also help people learn and practice social skills, which is vital for treating social anxiety disorder.Cognitive therapy and exposure therapy are two CBT methods that are often used, together or by themselves, to treat social anxiety disorder. Cognitive therapy focuses on identifying, challenging, and then neutralizing unhelpful or distorted thoughts underlying anxiety disorders. Exposure therapy focuses on confronting the fears underlying an anxiety disorder to help people engage in activities they have been avoiding. Exposure therapy is sometimes used along with relaxation exercises and/or imagery.CBT can be conducted individually or with a group of people who have similar difficulties. Often “homework” is assigned for participants to complete between sessions.Medication does not cure anxiety disorders but can help relieve symptoms. Medication for anxiety is prescribed by doctors, such as a psychiatrist or primary care provider. Some states also allow psychologists who have received specialized training to prescribe psychiatric medications. The most common classes of medications used to combat anxiety disorders are anti-anxiety drugs (such as benzodiazepines), antidepressants, and beta-blockers.Anti-Anxiety MedicationsAnti-anxiety medications can help reduce the symptoms of anxiety, panic attacks, or extreme fear and worry. The most common anti-anxiety medications are called benzodiazepines. Although benzodiazepines are sometimes used as first-line treatments for generalized anxiety disorder, they have both benefits and drawbacks.Some benefits of benzodiazepines are that they are effective in relieving anxiety and take effect more quickly than antidepressant medications often prescribed for anxiety. Some drawbacks of benzodiazepines are that people can build up a tolerance to them if they are taken over a long period of time and they may need higher and higher doses to get the same effect. Some people may even become dependent on them.To avoid these problems, doctors usually prescribe benzodiazepines for short periods of time, a practice that is especially helpful for older adults, people who have substance abuse problems, and people who become dependent on medication easily.If people suddenly stop taking benzodiazepines, they may have withdrawal symptoms, or their anxiety may return. Therefore, benzodiazepines should be tapered off slowly. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose.For long-term use, benzodiazepines are often considered a second-line treatment for anxiety (with antidepressants being considered a first-line treatment) as well as an “as-needed” treatment for any distressing flare-ups of symptoms.A different type of anti-anxiety medication is buspirone. Buspirone is a non-benzodiazepine medication specifically indicated for the treatment of chronic anxiety, although it does not help everyone.AntidepressantsAntidepressants are used to treat depression, but they can also be helpful for treating anxiety disorders. They may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. You may need to try several different antidepressant medicines before finding the one that improves your symptoms and has manageable side effects. A medication that has helped you or a close family member in the past will often be considered.Antidepressants can take time to work, so it’s important to give the medication a chance before reaching a conclusion about its effectiveness. If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Antidepressants called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) are commonly used as first-line treatments for anxiety. Less-commonly used — but effective — treatments for anxiety disorders are older classes of antidepressants, such as tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs).Please Note: In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may experience an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressant medications, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. Because of this, patients of all ages taking antidepressants should be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.Beta-BlockersAlthough beta-blockers are most often used to treat high blood pressure, they can also be used to help relieve the physical symptoms of anxiety, such as rapid heartbeat, shaking, trembling, and blushing. These medications, when taken for a short period of time, can help people keep physical symptoms under control. They can also be used “as needed” to reduce acute anxiety, including as a preventive intervention for some predictable forms of performance anxieties.Choosing the Right MedicationSome types of drugs may work better for specific types of anxiety disorders, so people should work closely with their doctor to identify which medication is best for them. Certain substances such as caffeine, some over-the-counter cold medicines, illicit drugs, and herbal supplements may aggravate the symptoms of anxiety disorders or interact with prescribed medication. Patients should talk with their doctor, so they can learn which substances are safe and which to avoid.Choosing the right medication, medication dose, and treatment plan should be done under an expert’s care and should be based on a person’s needs and their medical situation. Your doctor may try several medicines before finding the right one.You and your doctor should discuss:For more information, please visit Mental Health Medications Health Topic webpage. Please note that any information on this website regarding medications is provided for educational purposes only and may be outdated. Diagnosis and treatment decisions should be made in consultation with your doctor. Information about medications changes frequently. Please visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website for the latest information on warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Some people with anxiety disorders might benefit from joining a self-help or support group and sharing their problems and achievements with others. Internet chat rooms might also be useful, but any advice received over the internet should be used with caution, as Internet acquaintances have usually never seen each other and what has helped one person is not necessarily what is best for another. You should always check with your doctor before following any treatment advice found on the internet. Talking with a trusted friend or member of the clergy can also provide support, but it is not necessarily a sufficient alternative to care from a doctor or other health professional.Stress management techniques and meditation can help people with anxiety disorders calm themselves and may enhance the effects of therapy. Research suggests that aerobic exercise can help some people manage their anxiety; however, exercise should not take the place of standard care and more research is needed.Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including anxiety disorders. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, new psychotherapies, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe.Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future. Decisions about whether to apply for a clinical trial and which ones are best suited for a given individual are best made in collaboration with a licensed health professional.To learn more about clinical trials, please visit the NIH Clinical Research Trials and You website. To find a clinical trial, visit ClinicalTrials.gov.Last Revised: July 2018 Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreThis brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).This brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a chronic disorder in which a person has uncontrollable, reoccurring thoughts and behaviors.This brochure discusses symptoms, causes, and treatments for panic disorder, a type of anxiety disorder associated with sudden and repeated attacks of fear.More Publications About Anxiety DisordersThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuOccasional anxiety is an expected part of life. You might feel anxious when faced with a problem at work, before taking a test, or before making an important decision. But anxiety disorders involve more than temporary worry or fear. For a person with an anxiety disorder, the anxiety does not go away and can get worse over time. The symptoms can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, school work, and relationships.There are several types of anxiety disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and various phobia-related disorders.People with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) display excessive anxiety or worry, most days for at least 6 months, about a number of things such as personal health, work, social interactions, and everyday routine life circumstances. The fear and anxiety can cause significant problems in areas of their life, such as social interactions, school, and work.Generalized anxiety disorder symptoms include:People with panic disorder have recurrent unexpected panic attacks. Panic attacks are sudden periods of intense fear that come on quickly and reach their peak within minutes. Attacks can occur unexpectedly or can be brought on by a trigger, such as a feared object or situation.During a panic attack, people may experience:People with panic disorder often worry about when the next attack will happen and actively try to prevent future attacks by avoiding places, situations, or behaviors they associate with panic attacks. Worry about panic attacks, and the effort spent trying to avoid attacks, cause significant problems in various areas of the person’s life, including the development of agoraphobia (see below).A phobia is an intense fear of—or aversion to—specific objects or situations. Although it can be realistic to be anxious in some circumstances, the fear people with phobias feel is out of proportion to the actual danger caused by the situation or object.People with a phobia:There are several types of phobias and phobia-related disorders:Specific Phobias (sometimes called simple phobias): As the name suggests, people who have a specific phobia have an intense fear of, or feel intense anxiety about, specific types of objects or situations. Some examples of specific phobias include the fear of:Social anxiety disorder (previously called social phobia): People with social anxiety disorder have a general intense fear of, or anxiety toward, social or performance situations. They worry that actions or behaviors associated with their anxiety will be negatively evaluated by others, leading them to feel embarrassed. This worry often causes people with social anxiety to avoid social situations. Social anxiety disorder can manifest in a range of situations, such as within the workplace or the school environment.Agoraphobia: People with agoraphobia have an intense fear of two or more of the following situations:People with agoraphobia often avoid these situations, in part, because they think being able to leave might be difficult or impossible in the event they have panic-like reactions or other embarrassing symptoms. In the most severe form of agoraphobia, an individual can become housebound.Separation anxiety disorder: Separation anxiety is often thought of as something that only children deal with; however, adults can also be diagnosed with separation anxiety disorder. People who have separation anxiety disorder have fears about being parted from people to whom they are attached. They often worry that some sort of harm or something untoward will happen to their attachment figures while they are separated. This fear leads them to avoid being separated from their attachment figures and to avoid being alone. People with separation anxiety may have nightmares about being separated from attachment figures or experience physical symptoms when separation occurs or is anticipated.Selective mutism: A somewhat rare disorder associated with anxiety is selective mutism. Selective mutism occurs when people fail to speak in specific social situations despite having normal language skills. Selective mutism usually occurs before the age of 5 and is often associated with extreme shyness, fear of social embarrassment, compulsive traits, withdrawal, clinging behavior, and temper tantrums. People diagnosed with selective mutism are often also diagnosed with other anxiety disorders.Researchers are finding that both genetic and environmental factors contribute to the risk of developing an anxiety disorder. Although the risk factors for each type of anxiety disorder can vary, some general risk factors for all types of anxiety disorders include:Anxiety disorders are generally treated with psychotherapy, medication, or both. There are many ways to treat anxiety and people should work with their doctor to choose the treatment that is best for them.Psychotherapy or “talk therapy” can help people with anxiety disorders. To be effective, psychotherapy must be directed at the person’s specific anxieties and tailored to his or her needs.Cognitive Behavioral TherapyCognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) is an example of one type of psychotherapy that can help people with anxiety disorders. It teaches people different ways of thinking, behaving, and reacting to anxiety-producing and fearful objects and situations. CBT can also help people learn and practice social skills, which is vital for treating social anxiety disorder.Cognitive therapy and exposure therapy are two CBT methods that are often used, together or by themselves, to treat social anxiety disorder. Cognitive therapy focuses on identifying, challenging, and then neutralizing unhelpful or distorted thoughts underlying anxiety disorders. Exposure therapy focuses on confronting the fears underlying an anxiety disorder to help people engage in activities they have been avoiding. Exposure therapy is sometimes used along with relaxation exercises and/or imagery.CBT can be conducted individually or with a group of people who have similar difficulties. Often “homework” is assigned for participants to complete between sessions.Medication does not cure anxiety disorders but can help relieve symptoms. Medication for anxiety is prescribed by doctors, such as a psychiatrist or primary care provider. Some states also allow psychologists who have received specialized training to prescribe psychiatric medications. The most common classes of medications used to combat anxiety disorders are anti-anxiety drugs (such as benzodiazepines), antidepressants, and beta-blockers.Anti-Anxiety MedicationsAnti-anxiety medications can help reduce the symptoms of anxiety, panic attacks, or extreme fear and worry. The most common anti-anxiety medications are called benzodiazepines. Although benzodiazepines are sometimes used as first-line treatments for generalized anxiety disorder, they have both benefits and drawbacks.Some benefits of benzodiazepines are that they are effective in relieving anxiety and take effect more quickly than antidepressant medications often prescribed for anxiety. Some drawbacks of benzodiazepines are that people can build up a tolerance to them if they are taken over a long period of time and they may need higher and higher doses to get the same effect. Some people may even become dependent on them.To avoid these problems, doctors usually prescribe benzodiazepines for short periods of time, a practice that is especially helpful for older adults, people who have substance abuse problems, and people who become dependent on medication easily.If people suddenly stop taking benzodiazepines, they may have withdrawal symptoms, or their anxiety may return. Therefore, benzodiazepines should be tapered off slowly. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose.For long-term use, benzodiazepines are often considered a second-line treatment for anxiety (with antidepressants being considered a first-line treatment) as well as an “as-needed” treatment for any distressing flare-ups of symptoms.A different type of anti-anxiety medication is buspirone. Buspirone is a non-benzodiazepine medication specifically indicated for the treatment of chronic anxiety, although it does not help everyone.AntidepressantsAntidepressants are used to treat depression, but they can also be helpful for treating anxiety disorders. They may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. You may need to try several different antidepressant medicines before finding the one that improves your symptoms and has manageable side effects. A medication that has helped you or a close family member in the past will often be considered.Antidepressants can take time to work, so it’s important to give the medication a chance before reaching a conclusion about its effectiveness. If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Antidepressants called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) are commonly used as first-line treatments for anxiety. Less-commonly used — but effective — treatments for anxiety disorders are older classes of antidepressants, such as tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs).Please Note: In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may experience an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressant medications, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. Because of this, patients of all ages taking antidepressants should be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.Beta-BlockersAlthough beta-blockers are most often used to treat high blood pressure, they can also be used to help relieve the physical symptoms of anxiety, such as rapid heartbeat, shaking, trembling, and blushing. These medications, when taken for a short period of time, can help people keep physical symptoms under control. They can also be used “as needed” to reduce acute anxiety, including as a preventive intervention for some predictable forms of performance anxieties.Choosing the Right MedicationSome types of drugs may work better for specific types of anxiety disorders, so people should work closely with their doctor to identify which medication is best for them. Certain substances such as caffeine, some over-the-counter cold medicines, illicit drugs, and herbal supplements may aggravate the symptoms of anxiety disorders or interact with prescribed medication. Patients should talk with their doctor, so they can learn which substances are safe and which to avoid.Choosing the right medication, medication dose, and treatment plan should be done under an expert’s care and should be based on a person’s needs and their medical situation. Your doctor may try several medicines before finding the right one.You and your doctor should discuss:For more information, please visit Mental Health Medications Health Topic webpage. Please note that any information on this website regarding medications is provided for educational purposes only and may be outdated. Diagnosis and treatment decisions should be made in consultation with your doctor. Information about medications changes frequently. Please visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website for the latest information on warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Some people with anxiety disorders might benefit from joining a self-help or support group and sharing their problems and achievements with others. Internet chat rooms might also be useful, but any advice received over the internet should be used with caution, as Internet acquaintances have usually never seen each other and what has helped one person is not necessarily what is best for another. You should always check with your doctor before following any treatment advice found on the internet. Talking with a trusted friend or member of the clergy can also provide support, but it is not necessarily a sufficient alternative to care from a doctor or other health professional.Stress management techniques and meditation can help people with anxiety disorders calm themselves and may enhance the effects of therapy. Research suggests that aerobic exercise can help some people manage their anxiety; however, exercise should not take the place of standard care and more research is needed.Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including anxiety disorders. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, new psychotherapies, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe.Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future. Decisions about whether to apply for a clinical trial and which ones are best suited for a given individual are best made in collaboration with a licensed health professional.To learn more about clinical trials, please visit the NIH Clinical Research Trials and You website. To find a clinical trial, visit ClinicalTrials.gov.Last Revised: July 2018 Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreThis brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).This brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a chronic disorder in which a person has uncontrollable, reoccurring thoughts and behaviors.This brochure discusses symptoms, causes, and treatments for panic disorder, a type of anxiety disorder associated with sudden and repeated attacks of fear.More Publications About Anxiety DisordersThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuOccasional anxiety is an expected part of life. You might feel anxious when faced with a problem at work, before taking a test, or before making an important decision. But anxiety disorders involve more than temporary worry or fear. For a person with an anxiety disorder, the anxiety does not go away and can get worse over time. The symptoms can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, school work, and relationships.There are several types of anxiety disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and various phobia-related disorders.People with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) display excessive anxiety or worry, most days for at least 6 months, about a number of things such as personal health, work, social interactions, and everyday routine life circumstances. The fear and anxiety can cause significant problems in areas of their life, such as social interactions, school, and work.Generalized anxiety disorder symptoms include:People with panic disorder have recurrent unexpected panic attacks. Panic attacks are sudden periods of intense fear that come on quickly and reach their peak within minutes. Attacks can occur unexpectedly or can be brought on by a trigger, such as a feared object or situation.During a panic attack, people may experience:People with panic disorder often worry about when the next attack will happen and actively try to prevent future attacks by avoiding places, situations, or behaviors they associate with panic attacks. Worry about panic attacks, and the effort spent trying to avoid attacks, cause significant problems in various areas of the person’s life, including the development of agoraphobia (see below).A phobia is an intense fear of—or aversion to—specific objects or situations. Although it can be realistic to be anxious in some circumstances, the fear people with phobias feel is out of proportion to the actual danger caused by the situation or object.People with a phobia:There are several types of phobias and phobia-related disorders:Specific Phobias (sometimes called simple phobias): As the name suggests, people who have a specific phobia have an intense fear of, or feel intense anxiety about, specific types of objects or situations. Some examples of specific phobias include the fear of:Social anxiety disorder (previously called social phobia): People with social anxiety disorder have a general intense fear of, or anxiety toward, social or performance situations. They worry that actions or behaviors associated with their anxiety will be negatively evaluated by others, leading them to feel embarrassed. This worry often causes people with social anxiety to avoid social situations. Social anxiety disorder can manifest in a range of situations, such as within the workplace or the school environment.Agoraphobia: People with agoraphobia have an intense fear of two or more of the following situations:People with agoraphobia often avoid these situations, in part, because they think being able to leave might be difficult or impossible in the event they have panic-like reactions or other embarrassing symptoms. In the most severe form of agoraphobia, an individual can become housebound.Separation anxiety disorder: Separation anxiety is often thought of as something that only children deal with; however, adults can also be diagnosed with separation anxiety disorder. People who have separation anxiety disorder have fears about being parted from people to whom they are attached. They often worry that some sort of harm or something untoward will happen to their attachment figures while they are separated. This fear leads them to avoid being separated from their attachment figures and to avoid being alone. People with separation anxiety may have nightmares about being separated from attachment figures or experience physical symptoms when separation occurs or is anticipated.Selective mutism: A somewhat rare disorder associated with anxiety is selective mutism. Selective mutism occurs when people fail to speak in specific social situations despite having normal language skills. Selective mutism usually occurs before the age of 5 and is often associated with extreme shyness, fear of social embarrassment, compulsive traits, withdrawal, clinging behavior, and temper tantrums. People diagnosed with selective mutism are often also diagnosed with other anxiety disorders.Researchers are finding that both genetic and environmental factors contribute to the risk of developing an anxiety disorder. Although the risk factors for each type of anxiety disorder can vary, some general risk factors for all types of anxiety disorders include:Anxiety disorders are generally treated with psychotherapy, medication, or both. There are many ways to treat anxiety and people should work with their doctor to choose the treatment that is best for them.Psychotherapy or “talk therapy” can help people with anxiety disorders. To be effective, psychotherapy must be directed at the person’s specific anxieties and tailored to his or her needs.Cognitive Behavioral TherapyCognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) is an example of one type of psychotherapy that can help people with anxiety disorders. It teaches people different ways of thinking, behaving, and reacting to anxiety-producing and fearful objects and situations. CBT can also help people learn and practice social skills, which is vital for treating social anxiety disorder.Cognitive therapy and exposure therapy are two CBT methods that are often used, together or by themselves, to treat social anxiety disorder. Cognitive therapy focuses on identifying, challenging, and then neutralizing unhelpful or distorted thoughts underlying anxiety disorders. Exposure therapy focuses on confronting the fears underlying an anxiety disorder to help people engage in activities they have been avoiding. Exposure therapy is sometimes used along with relaxation exercises and/or imagery.CBT can be conducted individually or with a group of people who have similar difficulties. Often “homework” is assigned for participants to complete between sessions.Medication does not cure anxiety disorders but can help relieve symptoms. Medication for anxiety is prescribed by doctors, such as a psychiatrist or primary care provider. Some states also allow psychologists who have received specialized training to prescribe psychiatric medications. The most common classes of medications used to combat anxiety disorders are anti-anxiety drugs (such as benzodiazepines), antidepressants, and beta-blockers.Anti-Anxiety MedicationsAnti-anxiety medications can help reduce the symptoms of anxiety, panic attacks, or extreme fear and worry. The most common anti-anxiety medications are called benzodiazepines. Although benzodiazepines are sometimes used as first-line treatments for generalized anxiety disorder, they have both benefits and drawbacks.Some benefits of benzodiazepines are that they are effective in relieving anxiety and take effect more quickly than antidepressant medications often prescribed for anxiety. Some drawbacks of benzodiazepines are that people can build up a tolerance to them if they are taken over a long period of time and they may need higher and higher doses to get the same effect. Some people may even become dependent on them.To avoid these problems, doctors usually prescribe benzodiazepines for short periods of time, a practice that is especially helpful for older adults, people who have substance abuse problems, and people who become dependent on medication easily.If people suddenly stop taking benzodiazepines, they may have withdrawal symptoms, or their anxiety may return. Therefore, benzodiazepines should be tapered off slowly. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose.For long-term use, benzodiazepines are often considered a second-line treatment for anxiety (with antidepressants being considered a first-line treatment) as well as an “as-needed” treatment for any distressing flare-ups of symptoms.A different type of anti-anxiety medication is buspirone. Buspirone is a non-benzodiazepine medication specifically indicated for the treatment of chronic anxiety, although it does not help everyone.AntidepressantsAntidepressants are used to treat depression, but they can also be helpful for treating anxiety disorders. They may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. You may need to try several different antidepressant medicines before finding the one that improves your symptoms and has manageable side effects. A medication that has helped you or a close family member in the past will often be considered.Antidepressants can take time to work, so it’s important to give the medication a chance before reaching a conclusion about its effectiveness. If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Antidepressants called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) are commonly used as first-line treatments for anxiety. Less-commonly used — but effective — treatments for anxiety disorders are older classes of antidepressants, such as tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs).Please Note: In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may experience an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressant medications, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. Because of this, patients of all ages taking antidepressants should be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.Beta-BlockersAlthough beta-blockers are most often used to treat high blood pressure, they can also be used to help relieve the physical symptoms of anxiety, such as rapid heartbeat, shaking, trembling, and blushing. These medications, when taken for a short period of time, can help people keep physical symptoms under control. They can also be used “as needed” to reduce acute anxiety, including as a preventive intervention for some predictable forms of performance anxieties.Choosing the Right MedicationSome types of drugs may work better for specific types of anxiety disorders, so people should work closely with their doctor to identify which medication is best for them. Certain substances such as caffeine, some over-the-counter cold medicines, illicit drugs, and herbal supplements may aggravate the symptoms of anxiety disorders or interact with prescribed medication. Patients should talk with their doctor, so they can learn which substances are safe and which to avoid.Choosing the right medication, medication dose, and treatment plan should be done under an expert’s care and should be based on a person’s needs and their medical situation. Your doctor may try several medicines before finding the right one.You and your doctor should discuss:For more information, please visit Mental Health Medications Health Topic webpage. Please note that any information on this website regarding medications is provided for educational purposes only and may be outdated. Diagnosis and treatment decisions should be made in consultation with your doctor. Information about medications changes frequently. Please visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website for the latest information on warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Some people with anxiety disorders might benefit from joining a self-help or support group and sharing their problems and achievements with others. Internet chat rooms might also be useful, but any advice received over the internet should be used with caution, as Internet acquaintances have usually never seen each other and what has helped one person is not necessarily what is best for another. You should always check with your doctor before following any treatment advice found on the internet. Talking with a trusted friend or member of the clergy can also provide support, but it is not necessarily a sufficient alternative to care from a doctor or other health professional.Stress management techniques and meditation can help people with anxiety disorders calm themselves and may enhance the effects of therapy. Research suggests that aerobic exercise can help some people manage their anxiety; however, exercise should not take the place of standard care and more research is needed.Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including anxiety disorders. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, new psychotherapies, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe.Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future. Decisions about whether to apply for a clinical trial and which ones are best suited for a given individual are best made in collaboration with a licensed health professional.To learn more about clinical trials, please visit the NIH Clinical Research Trials and You website. To find a clinical trial, visit ClinicalTrials.gov.Last Revised: July 2018 Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreThis brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).This brochure discusses signs and symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment options for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a chronic disorder in which a person has uncontrollable, reoccurring thoughts and behaviors.This brochure discusses symptoms, causes, and treatments for panic disorder, a type of anxiety disorder associated with sudden and repeated attacks of fear.More Publications About Anxiety DisordersThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuAttention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a brain disorder marked by an ongoing pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes with functioning or development.Inattention and hyperactivity/impulsivity are the key behaviors of ADHD. Some people with ADHD only have problems with one of the behaviors, while others have both inattention and hyperactivity-impulsivity.Most children have the combined type of ADHD.In preschool, the most common ADHD symptom is hyperactivity.It is normal to have some inattention, unfocused motor activity and impulsivity, but for people with ADHD, these behaviors:People with symptoms of inattention may often:People with symptoms of hyperactivity-impulsivity may often:Diagnosis of ADHD requires a comprehensive evaluation by a licensed clinician, such as a pediatrician, psychologist, or psychiatrist with expertise in ADHD. For a person to receive a diagnosis of ADHD, the symptoms of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity must be chronic or long-lasting, impair the person’s functioning, and cause the person to fall behind normal development for his or her age. The doctor will also ensure that any ADHD symptoms are not due to another medical or psychiatric condition. Most children with ADHD receive a diagnosis during the elementary school years. For an adolescent or adult to receive a diagnosis of ADHD, the symptoms need to have been present prior to age 12.ADHD symptoms can appear as early as between the ages of 3 and 6 and can continue through adolescence and adulthood. Symptoms of ADHD can be mistaken for emotional or disciplinary problems or missed entirely in quiet, well-behaved children, leading to a delay in diagnosis. Adults with undiagnosed ADHD may have a history of poor academic performance, problems at work, or difficult or failed relationships.ADHD symptoms can change over time as a person ages. In young children with ADHD, hyperactivity-impulsivity is the most predominant symptom. As a child reaches elementary school, the symptom of inattention may become more prominent and cause the child to struggle academically. In adolescence, hyperactivity seems to lessen and may show more often as feelings of restlessness or fidgeting, but inattention and impulsivity may remain. Many adolescents with ADHD also struggle with relationships and antisocial behaviors. Inattention, restlessness, and impulsivity tend to persist into adulthood.Scientists are not sure what causes ADHD. Like many other illnesses, a number of factors can contribute to ADHD, such as:ADHD is more common in males than females, and females with ADHD are more likely to have problems primarily with inattention. Other conditions, such as learning disabilities, anxiety disorder, conduct disorder, depression, and substance abuse, are common in people with ADHD.While there is no cure for ADHD, currently available treatments can help reduce symptoms and improve functioning. Treatments include medication, psychotherapy, education or training, or a combination of treatments.For many people, ADHD medications reduce hyperactivity and impulsivity and improve their ability to focus, work, and learn. Medication also may improve physical coordination. Sometimes several different medications or dosages must be tried before finding the right one that works for a particular person. Anyone taking medications must be monitored closely and carefully by their prescribing doctor.Under medical supervision, stimulant medications are considered safe. However, there are risks and side effects, especially when misused or taken in excess of the prescribed dose.For example, stimulants can raise blood pressure and heart rate and increase anxiety. Therefore, a person with other health problems, including high blood pressure, seizures, heart disease, glaucoma, liver or kidney disease, or an anxiety disorder should tell their doctor before taking a stimulant.Talk with a doctor if you see any of these side effects while taking stimulants:Non-stimulants. A few other ADHD medications are non-stimulants. These medications take longer to start working than stimulants, but can also improve focus, attention, and impulsivity in a person with ADHD. Doctors may prescribe a non-stimulant: when a person has bothersome side effects from stimulants; when a stimulant was not effective; or in combination with a stimulant to increase effectiveness.Although not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) specifically for the treatment of ADHD, some antidepressants are sometimes used alone or in combination with a stimulant to treat ADHD. Antidepressants may help all of the symptoms of ADHD and can be prescribed if a patient has bothersome side effects from stimulants. Antidepressants can be helpful in combination with stimulants if a patient also has another condition, such as an anxiety disorder, depression, or another mood disorder.Doctors and patients can work together to find the best medication, dose, or medication combination. Learn the basics about stimulants and other mental health medications on the NIMH Mental Health Medications webpage and check the FDAwebsite (http://www.fda.gov/), for the latest information on warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Adding psychotherapy to treat ADHD can help patients and their families to better cope with everyday problems.Behavioral therapy is a type of psychotherapy that aims to help a person change his or her behavior. It might involve practical assistance, such as help organizing tasks or completing schoolwork, or working through emotionally difficult events. Behavioral therapy also teaches a person how to:Parents, teachers, and family members also can give positive or negative feedback for certain behaviors and help establish clear rules, chore lists, and other structured routines to help a person control his or her behavior. Therapists may also teach children social skills, such as how to wait their turn, share toys, ask for help, or respond to teasing. Learning to read facial expressions and the tone of voice in others, and how to respond appropriately can also be part of social skills training.Cognitive behavioral therapy can also teach a person mindfulness techniques, or meditation. A person learns how to be aware and accepting of one’s own thoughts and feelings to improve focus and concentration. The therapist also encourages the person with ADHD to adjust to the life changes that come with treatment, such as thinking before acting, or resisting the urge to take unnecessary risks.Family and marital therapy can help family members and spouses find better ways to handle disruptive behaviors, to encourage behavior changes, and improve interactions with the patient.For more information on psychotherapy, see the Psychotherapies webpage on the NIMH website.Children and adults with ADHD need guidance and understanding from their parents, families, and teachers to reach their full potential and to succeed. For school-age children, frustration, blame, and anger may have built up within a family before a child is diagnosed. Parents and children may need special help to overcome negative feelings. Mental health professionals can educate parents about ADHD and how it affects a family. They also will help the child and his or her parents develop new skills, attitudes, and ways of relating to each other.Parenting skills training (behavioral parent management training) teaches parents the skills they need to encourage and reward positive behaviors in their children. It helps parents learn how to use a system of rewards and consequences to change a child’s behavior. Parents are taught to give immediate and positive feedback for behaviors they want to encourage, and ignore or redirect behaviors that they want to discourage. They may also learn to structure situations in ways that support desired behavior.Stress management techniques can benefit parents of children with ADHD by increasing their ability to deal with frustration so that they can respond calmly to their child’s behavior.Support groups can help parents and families connect with others who have similar problems and concerns. Groups often meet regularly to share frustrations and successes, to exchange information about recommended specialists and strategies, and to talk with experts.Parents and teachers can help kids with ADHD stay organized and follow directions with tools such as:A professional counselor or therapist can help an adult with ADHD learn how to organize his or her life with tools such as:Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including ADHD. During clinical trials, investigated treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. In many trials, some participants are randomly assigned to the “control” group and receive an inactive “placebo” treatment or a standard intervention currently in use; sometimes the control subjects are later given a chance to try the experimental treatment. The object is to be able to compare the effect of the experimental treatment with standard or no treatment. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Scientists at the NIMH campus conduct research on numerous areas of study, including cognition, genetics, epidemiology, brain imaging, and treatment development. The studies take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland, and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with a clinician. Visit the NIMH Clinical Trials — Participants or Join a Study for more information.To find a clinical trial near you, visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial's purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.For more information about clinical trials, visit NIH Clinical Trials and You.Last Revised: March 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuAttention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a brain disorder marked by an ongoing pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes with functioning or development.Inattention and hyperactivity/impulsivity are the key behaviors of ADHD. Some people with ADHD only have problems with one of the behaviors, while others have both inattention and hyperactivity-impulsivity.Most children have the combined type of ADHD.In preschool, the most common ADHD symptom is hyperactivity.It is normal to have some inattention, unfocused motor activity and impulsivity, but for people with ADHD, these behaviors:People with symptoms of inattention may often:People with symptoms of hyperactivity-impulsivity may often:Diagnosis of ADHD requires a comprehensive evaluation by a licensed clinician, such as a pediatrician, psychologist, or psychiatrist with expertise in ADHD. For a person to receive a diagnosis of ADHD, the symptoms of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity must be chronic or long-lasting, impair the person’s functioning, and cause the person to fall behind normal development for his or her age. The doctor will also ensure that any ADHD symptoms are not due to another medical or psychiatric condition. Most children with ADHD receive a diagnosis during the elementary school years. For an adolescent or adult to receive a diagnosis of ADHD, the symptoms need to have been present prior to age 12.ADHD symptoms can appear as early as between the ages of 3 and 6 and can continue through adolescence and adulthood. Symptoms of ADHD can be mistaken for emotional or disciplinary problems or missed entirely in quiet, well-behaved children, leading to a delay in diagnosis. Adults with undiagnosed ADHD may have a history of poor academic performance, problems at work, or difficult or failed relationships.ADHD symptoms can change over time as a person ages. In young children with ADHD, hyperactivity-impulsivity is the most predominant symptom. As a child reaches elementary school, the symptom of inattention may become more prominent and cause the child to struggle academically. In adolescence, hyperactivity seems to lessen and may show more often as feelings of restlessness or fidgeting, but inattention and impulsivity may remain. Many adolescents with ADHD also struggle with relationships and antisocial behaviors. Inattention, restlessness, and impulsivity tend to persist into adulthood.Scientists are not sure what causes ADHD. Like many other illnesses, a number of factors can contribute to ADHD, such as:ADHD is more common in males than females, and females with ADHD are more likely to have problems primarily with inattention. Other conditions, such as learning disabilities, anxiety disorder, conduct disorder, depression, and substance abuse, are common in people with ADHD.While there is no cure for ADHD, currently available treatments can help reduce symptoms and improve functioning. Treatments include medication, psychotherapy, education or training, or a combination of treatments.For many people, ADHD medications reduce hyperactivity and impulsivity and improve their ability to focus, work, and learn. Medication also may improve physical coordination. Sometimes several different medications or dosages must be tried before finding the right one that works for a particular person. Anyone taking medications must be monitored closely and carefully by their prescribing doctor.Under medical supervision, stimulant medications are considered safe. However, there are risks and side effects, especially when misused or taken in excess of the prescribed dose.For example, stimulants can raise blood pressure and heart rate and increase anxiety. Therefore, a person with other health problems, including high blood pressure, seizures, heart disease, glaucoma, liver or kidney disease, or an anxiety disorder should tell their doctor before taking a stimulant.Talk with a doctor if you see any of these side effects while taking stimulants:Non-stimulants. A few other ADHD medications are non-stimulants. These medications take longer to start working than stimulants, but can also improve focus, attention, and impulsivity in a person with ADHD. Doctors may prescribe a non-stimulant: when a person has bothersome side effects from stimulants; when a stimulant was not effective; or in combination with a stimulant to increase effectiveness.Although not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) specifically for the treatment of ADHD, some antidepressants are sometimes used alone or in combination with a stimulant to treat ADHD. Antidepressants may help all of the symptoms of ADHD and can be prescribed if a patient has bothersome side effects from stimulants. Antidepressants can be helpful in combination with stimulants if a patient also has another condition, such as an anxiety disorder, depression, or another mood disorder.Doctors and patients can work together to find the best medication, dose, or medication combination. Learn the basics about stimulants and other mental health medications on the NIMH Mental Health Medications webpage and check the FDAwebsite (http://www.fda.gov/), for the latest information on warnings, patient medication guides, or newly approved medications.Adding psychotherapy to treat ADHD can help patients and their families to better cope with everyday problems.Behavioral therapy is a type of psychotherapy that aims to help a person change his or her behavior. It might involve practical assistance, such as help organizing tasks or completing schoolwork, or working through emotionally difficult events. Behavioral therapy also teaches a person how to:Parents, teachers, and family members also can give positive or negative feedback for certain behaviors and help establish clear rules, chore lists, and other structured routines to help a person control his or her behavior. Therapists may also teach children social skills, such as how to wait their turn, share toys, ask for help, or respond to teasing. Learning to read facial expressions and the tone of voice in others, and how to respond appropriately can also be part of social skills training.Cognitive behavioral therapy can also teach a person mindfulness techniques, or meditation. A person learns how to be aware and accepting of one’s own thoughts and feelings to improve focus and concentration. The therapist also encourages the person with ADHD to adjust to the life changes that come with treatment, such as thinking before acting, or resisting the urge to take unnecessary risks.Family and marital therapy can help family members and spouses find better ways to handle disruptive behaviors, to encourage behavior changes, and improve interactions with the patient.For more information on psychotherapy, see the Psychotherapies webpage on the NIMH website.Children and adults with ADHD need guidance and understanding from their parents, families, and teachers to reach their full potential and to succeed. For school-age children, frustration, blame, and anger may have built up within a family before a child is diagnosed. Parents and children may need special help to overcome negative feelings. Mental health professionals can educate parents about ADHD and how it affects a family. They also will help the child and his or her parents develop new skills, attitudes, and ways of relating to each other.Parenting skills training (behavioral parent management training) teaches parents the skills they need to encourage and reward positive behaviors in their children. It helps parents learn how to use a system of rewards and consequences to change a child’s behavior. Parents are taught to give immediate and positive feedback for behaviors they want to encourage, and ignore or redirect behaviors that they want to discourage. They may also learn to structure situations in ways that support desired behavior.Stress management techniques can benefit parents of children with ADHD by increasing their ability to deal with frustration so that they can respond calmly to their child’s behavior.Support groups can help parents and families connect with others who have similar problems and concerns. Groups often meet regularly to share frustrations and successes, to exchange information about recommended specialists and strategies, and to talk with experts.Parents and teachers can help kids with ADHD stay organized and follow directions with tools such as:A professional counselor or therapist can help an adult with ADHD learn how to organize his or her life with tools such as:Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including ADHD. During clinical trials, investigated treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. In many trials, some participants are randomly assigned to the “control” group and receive an inactive “placebo” treatment or a standard intervention currently in use; sometimes the control subjects are later given a chance to try the experimental treatment. The object is to be able to compare the effect of the experimental treatment with standard or no treatment. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Scientists at the NIMH campus conduct research on numerous areas of study, including cognition, genetics, epidemiology, brain imaging, and treatment development. The studies take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland, and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with a clinician. Visit the NIMH Clinical Trials — Participants or Join a Study for more information.To find a clinical trial near you, visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial's purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.For more information about clinical trials, visit NIH Clinical Trials and You.Last Revised: March 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuBipolar disorder, also known as manic-depressive illness, is a brain disorder that causes unusual shifts in mood, energy, activity levels, and the ability to carry out day-to-day tasks.There are four basic types of bipolar disorder; all of them involve clear changes in mood, energy, and activity levels. These moods range from periods of extremely “up,” elated, and energized behavior (known as manic episodes) to very sad, “down,” or hopeless periods (known as depressive episodes). Less severe manic periods are known as hypomanic episodes.People with bipolar disorder experience periods of unusually intense emotion, changes in sleep patterns and activity levels, and unusual behaviors. These distinct periods are called “mood episodes.” Mood episodes are drastically different from the moods and behaviors that are typical for the person. Extreme changes in energy, activity, and sleep go along with mood episodes.People having a manic episode may:People having a depressive episode may:Sometimes a mood episode includes symptoms of both manic and depressive symptoms. This is called an episode with mixed features. People experiencing an episode with mixed features may feel very sad, empty, or hopeless, while at the same time feeling extremely energized.Bipolar disorder can be present even when mood swings are less extreme. For example, some people with bipolar disorder experience hypomania, a less severe form of mania. During a hypomanic episode, an individual may feel very good, be highly productive, and function well. The person may not feel that anything is wrong, but family and friends may recognize the mood swings and/or changes in activity levels as possible bipolar disorder. Without proper treatment, people with hypomania may develop severe mania or depression.Proper diagnosis and treatment help people with bipolar disorder lead healthy and productive lives. Talking with a doctor or other licensed mental health professional is the first step for anyone who thinks he or she may have bipolar disorder. The doctor can complete a physical exam to rule out other conditions. If the problems are not caused by other illnesses, the doctor may conduct a mental health evaluation or provide a referral to a trained mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist, who is experienced in diagnosing and treating bipolar disorder.Note for Health Care Providers: People with bipolar disorder are more likely to seek help when they are depressed than when experiencing mania or hypomania. Therefore, a careful medical history is needed to ensure that bipolar disorder is not mistakenly diagnosed as major depression. Unlike people with bipolar disorder, people who have depression only (also called unipolar depression) do not experience mania. They may, however, experience some manic symptoms at the same time, which is also known as major depressive disorder with mixed features.Some bipolar disorder symptoms are similar to other illnesses, which can make it hard for a doctor to make a diagnosis. In addition, many people have bipolar disorder along with another illness such as anxiety disorder, substance abuse, or an eating disorder. People with bipolar disorder are also at higher risk for thyroid disease, migraine headaches, heart disease, diabetes, obesity, and other physical illnesses.Psychosis: Sometimes, a person with severe episodes of mania or depression also has psychotic symptoms, such as hallucinations or delusions. The psychotic symptoms tend to match the person’s extreme mood. For example:As a result, people with bipolar disorder who also have psychotic symptoms are sometimes misdiagnosed with schizophrenia.Anxiety and ADHD: Anxiety disorders and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are often diagnosed among people with bipolar disorder.Substance Abuse: People with bipolar disorder may also misuse alcohol or drugs, have relationship problems, or perform poorly in school or at work. Family, friends and people experiencing symptoms may not recognize these problems as signs of a major mental illness such as bipolar disorder.Scientists are studying the possible causes of bipolar disorder. Most agree that there is no single cause. Instead, it is likely that many factors contribute to the illness or increase risk.Brain Structure and Functioning: Some studies show how the brains of people with bipolar disorder may differ from the brains of healthy people or people with other mental disorders. Learning more about these differences, along with new information from genetic studies, helps scientists better understand bipolar disorder and predict which types of treatment will work most effectively.Genetics: Some research suggests that people with certain genes are more likely to develop bipolar disorder than others. But genes are not the only risk factor for bipolar disorder. Studies of identical twins have shown that even if one twin develops bipolar disorder, the other twin does not always develop the disorder, despite the fact that identical twins share all of the same genes.Family History: Bipolar disorder tends to run in families. Children with a parent or sibling who has bipolar disorder are much more likely to develop the illness, compared with children who do not have a family history of the disorder. However, it is important to note that most people with a family history of bipolar disorder will not develop the illness.Treatment helps many people—even those with the most severe forms of bipolar disorder—gain better control of their mood swings and other bipolar symptoms. An effective treatment plan usually includes a combination of medication and psychotherapy (also called “talk therapy”). Bipolar disorder is a lifelong illness. Episodes of mania and depression typically come back over time. Between episodes, many people with bipolar disorder are free of mood changes, but some people may have lingering symptoms. Long-term, continuous treatment helps to control these symptoms.Different types of medications can help control symptoms of bipolar disorder. An individual may need to try several different medications before finding ones that work best.Medications generally used to treat bipolar disorder include:Anyone taking a medication should:For basic information about medications, visit the NIMH Mental Health Medications webpage. For the most up-to-date information on medications, side effects, and warnings, visit the FDA website.When done in combination with medication, psychotherapy (also called “talk therapy”) can be an effective treatment for bipolar disorder. It can provide support, education, and guidance to people with bipolar disorder and their families. Some psychotherapy treatments used to treat bipolar disorder include:Visit the NIMH Psychotherapies webpage to learn about the various types of psychotherapies.Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT): ECT can provide relief for people with severe bipolar disorder who have not been able to recover with other treatments. Sometimes ECT is used for bipolar symptoms when other medical conditions, including pregnancy, make taking medications too risky. ECT may cause some short-term side effects, including confusion, disorientation, and memory loss. People with bipolar disorder should discuss possible benefits and risks of ECT with a qualified health professional.Sleep Medications: People with bipolar disorder who have trouble sleeping usually find that treatment is helpful. However, if sleeplessness does not improve, a doctor may suggest a change in medications. If the problem continues, the doctor may prescribe sedatives or other sleep medications.Supplements: Not much research has been conducted on herbal or natural supplements and how they may affect bipolar disorder.It is important for a doctor to know about all prescription drugs, over-the-counter medications, and supplements a client is taking. Certain medications and supplements taken together may cause unwanted or dangerous effects.Keeping a Life Chart: Even with proper treatment, mood changes can occur. Treatment is more effective when a client and doctor work closely together and talk openly about concerns and choices. Keeping a life chart that records daily mood symptoms, treatments, sleep patterns, and life events can help clients and doctors track and treat bipolar disorder most effectively.If You Are in Crisis: Call the toll-free National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (8255), available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The service is available to anyone. All calls are confidential.If you are thinking about harming yourself or thinking about suicide:If a loved one is considering suicide:Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including bipolar disorder. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Please Note: Decisions about whether to apply for a clinical trial and which ones are best suited for a given individual are best made in collaboration with your licensed health professional.Scientists at NIMH study many subjects including cognition, genetics, epidemiology, and psychiatry. The studies take place at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland, and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, participants come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with a clinician. Visit Join a Study: Bipolar Disorder – Adults or Join a Study: Bipolar Disorder – Children for more information.To find a clinical trial anywhere in the world, visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the globe. ClinicalTrials.gov has information about a trial’s purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers for more details. Anyone interested in joining a clinical trial should consult a health professional before making a commitment.Last Revised: April 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About Bipolar DisorderThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuBipolar disorder, also known as manic-depressive illness, is a brain disorder that causes unusual shifts in mood, energy, activity levels, and the ability to carry out day-to-day tasks.There are four basic types of bipolar disorder; all of them involve clear changes in mood, energy, and activity levels. These moods range from periods of extremely “up,” elated, and energized behavior (known as manic episodes) to very sad, “down,” or hopeless periods (known as depressive episodes). Less severe manic periods are known as hypomanic episodes.People with bipolar disorder experience periods of unusually intense emotion, changes in sleep patterns and activity levels, and unusual behaviors. These distinct periods are called “mood episodes.” Mood episodes are drastically different from the moods and behaviors that are typical for the person. Extreme changes in energy, activity, and sleep go along with mood episodes.People having a manic episode may:People having a depressive episode may:Sometimes a mood episode includes symptoms of both manic and depressive symptoms. This is called an episode with mixed features. People experiencing an episode with mixed features may feel very sad, empty, or hopeless, while at the same time feeling extremely energized.Bipolar disorder can be present even when mood swings are less extreme. For example, some people with bipolar disorder experience hypomania, a less severe form of mania. During a hypomanic episode, an individual may feel very good, be highly productive, and function well. The person may not feel that anything is wrong, but family and friends may recognize the mood swings and/or changes in activity levels as possible bipolar disorder. Without proper treatment, people with hypomania may develop severe mania or depression.Proper diagnosis and treatment help people with bipolar disorder lead healthy and productive lives. Talking with a doctor or other licensed mental health professional is the first step for anyone who thinks he or she may have bipolar disorder. The doctor can complete a physical exam to rule out other conditions. If the problems are not caused by other illnesses, the doctor may conduct a mental health evaluation or provide a referral to a trained mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist, who is experienced in diagnosing and treating bipolar disorder.Note for Health Care Providers: People with bipolar disorder are more likely to seek help when they are depressed than when experiencing mania or hypomania. Therefore, a careful medical history is needed to ensure that bipolar disorder is not mistakenly diagnosed as major depression. Unlike people with bipolar disorder, people who have depression only (also called unipolar depression) do not experience mania. They may, however, experience some manic symptoms at the same time, which is also known as major depressive disorder with mixed features.Some bipolar disorder symptoms are similar to other illnesses, which can make it hard for a doctor to make a diagnosis. In addition, many people have bipolar disorder along with another illness such as anxiety disorder, substance abuse, or an eating disorder. People with bipolar disorder are also at higher risk for thyroid disease, migraine headaches, heart disease, diabetes, obesity, and other physical illnesses.Psychosis: Sometimes, a person with severe episodes of mania or depression also has psychotic symptoms, such as hallucinations or delusions. The psychotic symptoms tend to match the person’s extreme mood. For example:As a result, people with bipolar disorder who also have psychotic symptoms are sometimes misdiagnosed with schizophrenia.Anxiety and ADHD: Anxiety disorders and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are often diagnosed among people with bipolar disorder.Substance Abuse: People with bipolar disorder may also misuse alcohol or drugs, have relationship problems, or perform poorly in school or at work. Family, friends and people experiencing symptoms may not recognize these problems as signs of a major mental illness such as bipolar disorder.Scientists are studying the possible causes of bipolar disorder. Most agree that there is no single cause. Instead, it is likely that many factors contribute to the illness or increase risk.Brain Structure and Functioning: Some studies show how the brains of people with bipolar disorder may differ from the brains of healthy people or people with other mental disorders. Learning more about these differences, along with new information from genetic studies, helps scientists better understand bipolar disorder and predict which types of treatment will work most effectively.Genetics: Some research suggests that people with certain genes are more likely to develop bipolar disorder than others. But genes are not the only risk factor for bipolar disorder. Studies of identical twins have shown that even if one twin develops bipolar disorder, the other twin does not always develop the disorder, despite the fact that identical twins share all of the same genes.Family History: Bipolar disorder tends to run in families. Children with a parent or sibling who has bipolar disorder are much more likely to develop the illness, compared with children who do not have a family history of the disorder. However, it is important to note that most people with a family history of bipolar disorder will not develop the illness.Treatment helps many people—even those with the most severe forms of bipolar disorder—gain better control of their mood swings and other bipolar symptoms. An effective treatment plan usually includes a combination of medication and psychotherapy (also called “talk therapy”). Bipolar disorder is a lifelong illness. Episodes of mania and depression typically come back over time. Between episodes, many people with bipolar disorder are free of mood changes, but some people may have lingering symptoms. Long-term, continuous treatment helps to control these symptoms.Different types of medications can help control symptoms of bipolar disorder. An individual may need to try several different medications before finding ones that work best.Medications generally used to treat bipolar disorder include:Anyone taking a medication should:For basic information about medications, visit the NIMH Mental Health Medications webpage. For the most up-to-date information on medications, side effects, and warnings, visit the FDA website.When done in combination with medication, psychotherapy (also called “talk therapy”) can be an effective treatment for bipolar disorder. It can provide support, education, and guidance to people with bipolar disorder and their families. Some psychotherapy treatments used to treat bipolar disorder include:Visit the NIMH Psychotherapies webpage to learn about the various types of psychotherapies.Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT): ECT can provide relief for people with severe bipolar disorder who have not been able to recover with other treatments. Sometimes ECT is used for bipolar symptoms when other medical conditions, including pregnancy, make taking medications too risky. ECT may cause some short-term side effects, including confusion, disorientation, and memory loss. People with bipolar disorder should discuss possible benefits and risks of ECT with a qualified health professional.Sleep Medications: People with bipolar disorder who have trouble sleeping usually find that treatment is helpful. However, if sleeplessness does not improve, a doctor may suggest a change in medications. If the problem continues, the doctor may prescribe sedatives or other sleep medications.Supplements: Not much research has been conducted on herbal or natural supplements and how they may affect bipolar disorder.It is important for a doctor to know about all prescription drugs, over-the-counter medications, and supplements a client is taking. Certain medications and supplements taken together may cause unwanted or dangerous effects.Keeping a Life Chart: Even with proper treatment, mood changes can occur. Treatment is more effective when a client and doctor work closely together and talk openly about concerns and choices. Keeping a life chart that records daily mood symptoms, treatments, sleep patterns, and life events can help clients and doctors track and treat bipolar disorder most effectively.If You Are in Crisis: Call the toll-free National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (8255), available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The service is available to anyone. All calls are confidential.If you are thinking about harming yourself or thinking about suicide:If a loved one is considering suicide:Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including bipolar disorder. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Please Note: Decisions about whether to apply for a clinical trial and which ones are best suited for a given individual are best made in collaboration with your licensed health professional.Scientists at NIMH study many subjects including cognition, genetics, epidemiology, and psychiatry. The studies take place at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland, and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, participants come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with a clinician. Visit Join a Study: Bipolar Disorder – Adults or Join a Study: Bipolar Disorder – Children for more information.To find a clinical trial anywhere in the world, visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the globe. ClinicalTrials.gov has information about a trial’s purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers for more details. Anyone interested in joining a clinical trial should consult a health professional before making a commitment.Last Revised: April 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About Bipolar DisorderThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuBipolar disorder, also known as manic-depressive illness, is a brain disorder that causes unusual shifts in mood, energy, activity levels, and the ability to carry out day-to-day tasks.There are four basic types of bipolar disorder; all of them involve clear changes in mood, energy, and activity levels. These moods range from periods of extremely “up,” elated, and energized behavior (known as manic episodes) to very sad, “down,” or hopeless periods (known as depressive episodes). Less severe manic periods are known as hypomanic episodes.People with bipolar disorder experience periods of unusually intense emotion, changes in sleep patterns and activity levels, and unusual behaviors. These distinct periods are called “mood episodes.” Mood episodes are drastically different from the moods and behaviors that are typical for the person. Extreme changes in energy, activity, and sleep go along with mood episodes.People having a manic episode may:People having a depressive episode may:Sometimes a mood episode includes symptoms of both manic and depressive symptoms. This is called an episode with mixed features. People experiencing an episode with mixed features may feel very sad, empty, or hopeless, while at the same time feeling extremely energized.Bipolar disorder can be present even when mood swings are less extreme. For example, some people with bipolar disorder experience hypomania, a less severe form of mania. During a hypomanic episode, an individual may feel very good, be highly productive, and function well. The person may not feel that anything is wrong, but family and friends may recognize the mood swings and/or changes in activity levels as possible bipolar disorder. Without proper treatment, people with hypomania may develop severe mania or depression.Proper diagnosis and treatment help people with bipolar disorder lead healthy and productive lives. Talking with a doctor or other licensed mental health professional is the first step for anyone who thinks he or she may have bipolar disorder. The doctor can complete a physical exam to rule out other conditions. If the problems are not caused by other illnesses, the doctor may conduct a mental health evaluation or provide a referral to a trained mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist, who is experienced in diagnosing and treating bipolar disorder.Note for Health Care Providers: People with bipolar disorder are more likely to seek help when they are depressed than when experiencing mania or hypomania. Therefore, a careful medical history is needed to ensure that bipolar disorder is not mistakenly diagnosed as major depression. Unlike people with bipolar disorder, people who have depression only (also called unipolar depression) do not experience mania. They may, however, experience some manic symptoms at the same time, which is also known as major depressive disorder with mixed features.Some bipolar disorder symptoms are similar to other illnesses, which can make it hard for a doctor to make a diagnosis. In addition, many people have bipolar disorder along with another illness such as anxiety disorder, substance abuse, or an eating disorder. People with bipolar disorder are also at higher risk for thyroid disease, migraine headaches, heart disease, diabetes, obesity, and other physical illnesses.Psychosis: Sometimes, a person with severe episodes of mania or depression also has psychotic symptoms, such as hallucinations or delusions. The psychotic symptoms tend to match the person’s extreme mood. For example:As a result, people with bipolar disorder who also have psychotic symptoms are sometimes misdiagnosed with schizophrenia.Anxiety and ADHD: Anxiety disorders and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are often diagnosed among people with bipolar disorder.Substance Abuse: People with bipolar disorder may also misuse alcohol or drugs, have relationship problems, or perform poorly in school or at work. Family, friends and people experiencing symptoms may not recognize these problems as signs of a major mental illness such as bipolar disorder.Scientists are studying the possible causes of bipolar disorder. Most agree that there is no single cause. Instead, it is likely that many factors contribute to the illness or increase risk.Brain Structure and Functioning: Some studies show how the brains of people with bipolar disorder may differ from the brains of healthy people or people with other mental disorders. Learning more about these differences, along with new information from genetic studies, helps scientists better understand bipolar disorder and predict which types of treatment will work most effectively.Genetics: Some research suggests that people with certain genes are more likely to develop bipolar disorder than others. But genes are not the only risk factor for bipolar disorder. Studies of identical twins have shown that even if one twin develops bipolar disorder, the other twin does not always develop the disorder, despite the fact that identical twins share all of the same genes.Family History: Bipolar disorder tends to run in families. Children with a parent or sibling who has bipolar disorder are much more likely to develop the illness, compared with children who do not have a family history of the disorder. However, it is important to note that most people with a family history of bipolar disorder will not develop the illness.Treatment helps many people—even those with the most severe forms of bipolar disorder—gain better control of their mood swings and other bipolar symptoms. An effective treatment plan usually includes a combination of medication and psychotherapy (also called “talk therapy”). Bipolar disorder is a lifelong illness. Episodes of mania and depression typically come back over time. Between episodes, many people with bipolar disorder are free of mood changes, but some people may have lingering symptoms. Long-term, continuous treatment helps to control these symptoms.Different types of medications can help control symptoms of bipolar disorder. An individual may need to try several different medications before finding ones that work best.Medications generally used to treat bipolar disorder include:Anyone taking a medication should:For basic information about medications, visit the NIMH Mental Health Medications webpage. For the most up-to-date information on medications, side effects, and warnings, visit the FDA website.When done in combination with medication, psychotherapy (also called “talk therapy”) can be an effective treatment for bipolar disorder. It can provide support, education, and guidance to people with bipolar disorder and their families. Some psychotherapy treatments used to treat bipolar disorder include:Visit the NIMH Psychotherapies webpage to learn about the various types of psychotherapies.Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT): ECT can provide relief for people with severe bipolar disorder who have not been able to recover with other treatments. Sometimes ECT is used for bipolar symptoms when other medical conditions, including pregnancy, make taking medications too risky. ECT may cause some short-term side effects, including confusion, disorientation, and memory loss. People with bipolar disorder should discuss possible benefits and risks of ECT with a qualified health professional.Sleep Medications: People with bipolar disorder who have trouble sleeping usually find that treatment is helpful. However, if sleeplessness does not improve, a doctor may suggest a change in medications. If the problem continues, the doctor may prescribe sedatives or other sleep medications.Supplements: Not much research has been conducted on herbal or natural supplements and how they may affect bipolar disorder.It is important for a doctor to know about all prescription drugs, over-the-counter medications, and supplements a client is taking. Certain medications and supplements taken together may cause unwanted or dangerous effects.Keeping a Life Chart: Even with proper treatment, mood changes can occur. Treatment is more effective when a client and doctor work closely together and talk openly about concerns and choices. Keeping a life chart that records daily mood symptoms, treatments, sleep patterns, and life events can help clients and doctors track and treat bipolar disorder most effectively.If You Are in Crisis: Call the toll-free National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (8255), available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The service is available to anyone. All calls are confidential.If you are thinking about harming yourself or thinking about suicide:If a loved one is considering suicide:Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including bipolar disorder. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Please Note: Decisions about whether to apply for a clinical trial and which ones are best suited for a given individual are best made in collaboration with your licensed health professional.Scientists at NIMH study many subjects including cognition, genetics, epidemiology, and psychiatry. The studies take place at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland, and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, participants come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with a clinician. Visit Join a Study: Bipolar Disorder – Adults or Join a Study: Bipolar Disorder – Children for more information.To find a clinical trial anywhere in the world, visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the globe. ClinicalTrials.gov has information about a trial’s purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers for more details. Anyone interested in joining a clinical trial should consult a health professional before making a commitment.Last Revised: April 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About Bipolar DisorderThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuBipolar disorder, also known as manic-depressive illness, is a brain disorder that causes unusual shifts in mood, energy, activity levels, and the ability to carry out day-to-day tasks.There are four basic types of bipolar disorder; all of them involve clear changes in mood, energy, and activity levels. These moods range from periods of extremely “up,” elated, and energized behavior (known as manic episodes) to very sad, “down,” or hopeless periods (known as depressive episodes). Less severe manic periods are known as hypomanic episodes.People with bipolar disorder experience periods of unusually intense emotion, changes in sleep patterns and activity levels, and unusual behaviors. These distinct periods are called “mood episodes.” Mood episodes are drastically different from the moods and behaviors that are typical for the person. Extreme changes in energy, activity, and sleep go along with mood episodes.People having a manic episode may:People having a depressive episode may:Sometimes a mood episode includes symptoms of both manic and depressive symptoms. This is called an episode with mixed features. People experiencing an episode with mixed features may feel very sad, empty, or hopeless, while at the same time feeling extremely energized.Bipolar disorder can be present even when mood swings are less extreme. For example, some people with bipolar disorder experience hypomania, a less severe form of mania. During a hypomanic episode, an individual may feel very good, be highly productive, and function well. The person may not feel that anything is wrong, but family and friends may recognize the mood swings and/or changes in activity levels as possible bipolar disorder. Without proper treatment, people with hypomania may develop severe mania or depression.Proper diagnosis and treatment help people with bipolar disorder lead healthy and productive lives. Talking with a doctor or other licensed mental health professional is the first step for anyone who thinks he or she may have bipolar disorder. The doctor can complete a physical exam to rule out other conditions. If the problems are not caused by other illnesses, the doctor may conduct a mental health evaluation or provide a referral to a trained mental health professional, such as a psychiatrist, who is experienced in diagnosing and treating bipolar disorder.Note for Health Care Providers: People with bipolar disorder are more likely to seek help when they are depressed than when experiencing mania or hypomania. Therefore, a careful medical history is needed to ensure that bipolar disorder is not mistakenly diagnosed as major depression. Unlike people with bipolar disorder, people who have depression only (also called unipolar depression) do not experience mania. They may, however, experience some manic symptoms at the same time, which is also known as major depressive disorder with mixed features.Some bipolar disorder symptoms are similar to other illnesses, which can make it hard for a doctor to make a diagnosis. In addition, many people have bipolar disorder along with another illness such as anxiety disorder, substance abuse, or an eating disorder. People with bipolar disorder are also at higher risk for thyroid disease, migraine headaches, heart disease, diabetes, obesity, and other physical illnesses.Psychosis: Sometimes, a person with severe episodes of mania or depression also has psychotic symptoms, such as hallucinations or delusions. The psychotic symptoms tend to match the person’s extreme mood. For example:As a result, people with bipolar disorder who also have psychotic symptoms are sometimes misdiagnosed with schizophrenia.Anxiety and ADHD: Anxiety disorders and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are often diagnosed among people with bipolar disorder.Substance Abuse: People with bipolar disorder may also misuse alcohol or drugs, have relationship problems, or perform poorly in school or at work. Family, friends and people experiencing symptoms may not recognize these problems as signs of a major mental illness such as bipolar disorder.Scientists are studying the possible causes of bipolar disorder. Most agree that there is no single cause. Instead, it is likely that many factors contribute to the illness or increase risk.Brain Structure and Functioning: Some studies show how the brains of people with bipolar disorder may differ from the brains of healthy people or people with other mental disorders. Learning more about these differences, along with new information from genetic studies, helps scientists better understand bipolar disorder and predict which types of treatment will work most effectively.Genetics: Some research suggests that people with certain genes are more likely to develop bipolar disorder than others. But genes are not the only risk factor for bipolar disorder. Studies of identical twins have shown that even if one twin develops bipolar disorder, the other twin does not always develop the disorder, despite the fact that identical twins share all of the same genes.Family History: Bipolar disorder tends to run in families. Children with a parent or sibling who has bipolar disorder are much more likely to develop the illness, compared with children who do not have a family history of the disorder. However, it is important to note that most people with a family history of bipolar disorder will not develop the illness.Treatment helps many people—even those with the most severe forms of bipolar disorder—gain better control of their mood swings and other bipolar symptoms. An effective treatment plan usually includes a combination of medication and psychotherapy (also called “talk therapy”). Bipolar disorder is a lifelong illness. Episodes of mania and depression typically come back over time. Between episodes, many people with bipolar disorder are free of mood changes, but some people may have lingering symptoms. Long-term, continuous treatment helps to control these symptoms.Different types of medications can help control symptoms of bipolar disorder. An individual may need to try several different medications before finding ones that work best.Medications generally used to treat bipolar disorder include:Anyone taking a medication should:For basic information about medications, visit the NIMH Mental Health Medications webpage. For the most up-to-date information on medications, side effects, and warnings, visit the FDA website.When done in combination with medication, psychotherapy (also called “talk therapy”) can be an effective treatment for bipolar disorder. It can provide support, education, and guidance to people with bipolar disorder and their families. Some psychotherapy treatments used to treat bipolar disorder include:Visit the NIMH Psychotherapies webpage to learn about the various types of psychotherapies.Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT): ECT can provide relief for people with severe bipolar disorder who have not been able to recover with other treatments. Sometimes ECT is used for bipolar symptoms when other medical conditions, including pregnancy, make taking medications too risky. ECT may cause some short-term side effects, including confusion, disorientation, and memory loss. People with bipolar disorder should discuss possible benefits and risks of ECT with a qualified health professional.Sleep Medications: People with bipolar disorder who have trouble sleeping usually find that treatment is helpful. However, if sleeplessness does not improve, a doctor may suggest a change in medications. If the problem continues, the doctor may prescribe sedatives or other sleep medications.Supplements: Not much research has been conducted on herbal or natural supplements and how they may affect bipolar disorder.It is important for a doctor to know about all prescription drugs, over-the-counter medications, and supplements a client is taking. Certain medications and supplements taken together may cause unwanted or dangerous effects.Keeping a Life Chart: Even with proper treatment, mood changes can occur. Treatment is more effective when a client and doctor work closely together and talk openly about concerns and choices. Keeping a life chart that records daily mood symptoms, treatments, sleep patterns, and life events can help clients and doctors track and treat bipolar disorder most effectively.If You Are in Crisis: Call the toll-free National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (8255), available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The service is available to anyone. All calls are confidential.If you are thinking about harming yourself or thinking about suicide:If a loved one is considering suicide:Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including bipolar disorder. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Please Note: Decisions about whether to apply for a clinical trial and which ones are best suited for a given individual are best made in collaboration with your licensed health professional.Scientists at NIMH study many subjects including cognition, genetics, epidemiology, and psychiatry. The studies take place at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland, and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, participants come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with a clinician. Visit Join a Study: Bipolar Disorder – Adults or Join a Study: Bipolar Disorder – Children for more information.To find a clinical trial anywhere in the world, visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the globe. ClinicalTrials.gov has information about a trial’s purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers for more details. Anyone interested in joining a clinical trial should consult a health professional before making a commitment.Last Revised: April 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About Bipolar DisorderThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDepression (major depressive disorder or clinical depression) is a common but serious mood disorder. It causes severe symptoms that affect how you feel, think, and handle daily activities, such as sleeping, eating, or working. To be diagnosed with depression, the symptoms must be present for at least two weeks.Some forms of depression are slightly different, or they may develop under unique circumstances, such as:Examples of other types of depressive disorders newly added to the diagnostic classification of DSM-5 include disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (diagnosed in children and adolescents) and premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD).If you have been experiencing some of the following signs and symptoms most of the day, nearly every day, for at least two weeks, you may be suffering from depression:Not everyone who is depressed experiences every symptom. Some people experience only a few symptoms while others may experience many. Several persistent symptoms in addition to low mood are required for a diagnosis of major depression, but people with only a few – but distressing – symptoms may benefit from treatment of their “subsyndromal” depression. The severity and frequency of symptoms and how long they last will vary depending on the individual and his or her particular illness. Symptoms may also vary depending on the stage of the illness.Depression is one of the most common mental disorders in the U.S. Current research suggests that depression is caused by a combination of genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors.Depression can happen at any age, but often begins in adulthood. Depression is now recognized as occurring in children and adolescents, although it sometimes presents with more prominent irritability than low mood. Many chronic mood and anxiety disorders in adults begin as high levels of anxiety in children.Depression, especially in midlife or older adults, can co-occur with other serious medical illnesses, such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and Parkinson’s disease. These conditions are often worse when depression is present. Sometimes medications taken for these physical illnesses may cause side effects that contribute to depression. A doctor experienced in treating these complicated illnesses can help work out the best treatment strategy.Risk factors include:Depression, even the most severe cases, can be treated. The earlier that treatment can begin, the more effective it is. Depression is usually treated with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. If these treatments do not reduce symptoms, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and other brain stimulation therapies may be options to explore.Quick Tip: No two people are affected the same way by depression and there is no "one-size-fits-all" for treatment. It may take some trial and error to find the treatment that works best for you.Antidepressants are medicines that treat depression. They may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. You may need to try several different antidepressant medicines before finding the one that improves your symptoms and has manageable side effects. A medication that has helped you or a close family member in the past will often be considered.Antidepressants take time – usually 2 to 4 weeks – to work, and often, symptoms such as sleep, appetite, and concentration problems improve before mood lifts, so it is important to give medication a chance before reaching a conclusion about its effectiveness. If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. Sometimes people taking antidepressants feel better and then stop taking the medication on their own, and the depression returns. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, usually after a course of 6 to 12 months, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Please Note: In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may experience an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. This warning from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) also says that patients of all ages taking antidepressants should be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.If you are considering taking an antidepressant and you are pregnant, planning to become pregnant, or breastfeeding, talk to your doctor about any increased health risks to you or your unborn or nursing child.To find the latest information about antidepressants, talk to your doctor and visit www.fda.gov.You may have heard about an herbal medicine called St. John's wort. Although it is a top-selling botanical product, the FDA has not approved its use as an over-the-counter or prescription medicine for depression, and there are serious concerns about its safety (it should never be combined with a prescription antidepressant) and effectiveness. Do not use St. John’s wort before talking to your health care provider. Other natural products sold as dietary supplements, including omega-3 fatty acids and S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe), remain under study but have not yet been proven safe and effective for routine use. For more information on herbal and other complementary approaches and current research, please visit the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health website.Several types of psychotherapy (also called “talk therapy” or, in a less specific form, counseling) can help people with depression. Examples of evidence-based approaches specific to the treatment of depression include cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), interpersonal therapy (IPT), and problem-solving therapy. More information on psychotherapy is available on the NIMH website and in the NIMH publication Depression: What You Need to Know.If medications do not reduce the symptoms of depression, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) may be an option to explore. Based on the latest research:Other more recently introduced types of brain stimulation therapies used to treat medicine-resistant depression include repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) and vagus nerve stimulation (VNS). Other types of brain stimulation treatments are under study. You can learn more about these therapies on the NIMH Brain Stimulation Therapies webpage.If you think you may have depression, start by making an appointment to see your doctor or health care provider. This could be your primary care practitioner or a health provider who specializes in diagnosing and treating mental health conditions. Visit the NIMH Find Help for Mental Illnesses if you are unsure of where to start.Here are other tips that may help you or a loved one during treatment for depression:Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including depression. During clinical trials, some participants receive treatments under study that might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. Other participants (in the “control group”) receive a standard treatment, such as a medication already on the market, an inactive placebo medication, or no treatment. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Doctors at NIMH are dedicated to mental health research, including clinical trials of possible new treatments as well as studies to understand the causes and effects of depression. The studies take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with one of our clinicians. Find NIMH studies currently recruiting participants with depression by visiting Join a Research Study: Depression.To search for a clinical trial near you, you can visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world (search: depression). ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial's purpose, who may participate, locations, and contact information for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.Last Revised: February 2018Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our  Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About DepressionThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDepression (major depressive disorder or clinical depression) is a common but serious mood disorder. It causes severe symptoms that affect how you feel, think, and handle daily activities, such as sleeping, eating, or working. To be diagnosed with depression, the symptoms must be present for at least two weeks.Some forms of depression are slightly different, or they may develop under unique circumstances, such as:Examples of other types of depressive disorders newly added to the diagnostic classification of DSM-5 include disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (diagnosed in children and adolescents) and premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD).If you have been experiencing some of the following signs and symptoms most of the day, nearly every day, for at least two weeks, you may be suffering from depression:Not everyone who is depressed experiences every symptom. Some people experience only a few symptoms while others may experience many. Several persistent symptoms in addition to low mood are required for a diagnosis of major depression, but people with only a few – but distressing – symptoms may benefit from treatment of their “subsyndromal” depression. The severity and frequency of symptoms and how long they last will vary depending on the individual and his or her particular illness. Symptoms may also vary depending on the stage of the illness.Depression is one of the most common mental disorders in the U.S. Current research suggests that depression is caused by a combination of genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors.Depression can happen at any age, but often begins in adulthood. Depression is now recognized as occurring in children and adolescents, although it sometimes presents with more prominent irritability than low mood. Many chronic mood and anxiety disorders in adults begin as high levels of anxiety in children.Depression, especially in midlife or older adults, can co-occur with other serious medical illnesses, such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and Parkinson’s disease. These conditions are often worse when depression is present. Sometimes medications taken for these physical illnesses may cause side effects that contribute to depression. A doctor experienced in treating these complicated illnesses can help work out the best treatment strategy.Risk factors include:Depression, even the most severe cases, can be treated. The earlier that treatment can begin, the more effective it is. Depression is usually treated with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. If these treatments do not reduce symptoms, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and other brain stimulation therapies may be options to explore.Quick Tip: No two people are affected the same way by depression and there is no "one-size-fits-all" for treatment. It may take some trial and error to find the treatment that works best for you.Antidepressants are medicines that treat depression. They may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. You may need to try several different antidepressant medicines before finding the one that improves your symptoms and has manageable side effects. A medication that has helped you or a close family member in the past will often be considered.Antidepressants take time – usually 2 to 4 weeks – to work, and often, symptoms such as sleep, appetite, and concentration problems improve before mood lifts, so it is important to give medication a chance before reaching a conclusion about its effectiveness. If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. Sometimes people taking antidepressants feel better and then stop taking the medication on their own, and the depression returns. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, usually after a course of 6 to 12 months, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Please Note: In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may experience an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. This warning from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) also says that patients of all ages taking antidepressants should be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.If you are considering taking an antidepressant and you are pregnant, planning to become pregnant, or breastfeeding, talk to your doctor about any increased health risks to you or your unborn or nursing child.To find the latest information about antidepressants, talk to your doctor and visit www.fda.gov.You may have heard about an herbal medicine called St. John's wort. Although it is a top-selling botanical product, the FDA has not approved its use as an over-the-counter or prescription medicine for depression, and there are serious concerns about its safety (it should never be combined with a prescription antidepressant) and effectiveness. Do not use St. John’s wort before talking to your health care provider. Other natural products sold as dietary supplements, including omega-3 fatty acids and S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe), remain under study but have not yet been proven safe and effective for routine use. For more information on herbal and other complementary approaches and current research, please visit the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health website.Several types of psychotherapy (also called “talk therapy” or, in a less specific form, counseling) can help people with depression. Examples of evidence-based approaches specific to the treatment of depression include cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), interpersonal therapy (IPT), and problem-solving therapy. More information on psychotherapy is available on the NIMH website and in the NIMH publication Depression: What You Need to Know.If medications do not reduce the symptoms of depression, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) may be an option to explore. Based on the latest research:Other more recently introduced types of brain stimulation therapies used to treat medicine-resistant depression include repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) and vagus nerve stimulation (VNS). Other types of brain stimulation treatments are under study. You can learn more about these therapies on the NIMH Brain Stimulation Therapies webpage.If you think you may have depression, start by making an appointment to see your doctor or health care provider. This could be your primary care practitioner or a health provider who specializes in diagnosing and treating mental health conditions. Visit the NIMH Find Help for Mental Illnesses if you are unsure of where to start.Here are other tips that may help you or a loved one during treatment for depression:Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including depression. During clinical trials, some participants receive treatments under study that might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. Other participants (in the “control group”) receive a standard treatment, such as a medication already on the market, an inactive placebo medication, or no treatment. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Doctors at NIMH are dedicated to mental health research, including clinical trials of possible new treatments as well as studies to understand the causes and effects of depression. The studies take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with one of our clinicians. Find NIMH studies currently recruiting participants with depression by visiting Join a Research Study: Depression.To search for a clinical trial near you, you can visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world (search: depression). ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial's purpose, who may participate, locations, and contact information for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.Last Revised: February 2018Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our  Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About DepressionThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDepression (major depressive disorder or clinical depression) is a common but serious mood disorder. It causes severe symptoms that affect how you feel, think, and handle daily activities, such as sleeping, eating, or working. To be diagnosed with depression, the symptoms must be present for at least two weeks.Some forms of depression are slightly different, or they may develop under unique circumstances, such as:Examples of other types of depressive disorders newly added to the diagnostic classification of DSM-5 include disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (diagnosed in children and adolescents) and premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD).If you have been experiencing some of the following signs and symptoms most of the day, nearly every day, for at least two weeks, you may be suffering from depression:Not everyone who is depressed experiences every symptom. Some people experience only a few symptoms while others may experience many. Several persistent symptoms in addition to low mood are required for a diagnosis of major depression, but people with only a few – but distressing – symptoms may benefit from treatment of their “subsyndromal” depression. The severity and frequency of symptoms and how long they last will vary depending on the individual and his or her particular illness. Symptoms may also vary depending on the stage of the illness.Depression is one of the most common mental disorders in the U.S. Current research suggests that depression is caused by a combination of genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors.Depression can happen at any age, but often begins in adulthood. Depression is now recognized as occurring in children and adolescents, although it sometimes presents with more prominent irritability than low mood. Many chronic mood and anxiety disorders in adults begin as high levels of anxiety in children.Depression, especially in midlife or older adults, can co-occur with other serious medical illnesses, such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and Parkinson’s disease. These conditions are often worse when depression is present. Sometimes medications taken for these physical illnesses may cause side effects that contribute to depression. A doctor experienced in treating these complicated illnesses can help work out the best treatment strategy.Risk factors include:Depression, even the most severe cases, can be treated. The earlier that treatment can begin, the more effective it is. Depression is usually treated with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. If these treatments do not reduce symptoms, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and other brain stimulation therapies may be options to explore.Quick Tip: No two people are affected the same way by depression and there is no "one-size-fits-all" for treatment. It may take some trial and error to find the treatment that works best for you.Antidepressants are medicines that treat depression. They may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. You may need to try several different antidepressant medicines before finding the one that improves your symptoms and has manageable side effects. A medication that has helped you or a close family member in the past will often be considered.Antidepressants take time – usually 2 to 4 weeks – to work, and often, symptoms such as sleep, appetite, and concentration problems improve before mood lifts, so it is important to give medication a chance before reaching a conclusion about its effectiveness. If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. Sometimes people taking antidepressants feel better and then stop taking the medication on their own, and the depression returns. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, usually after a course of 6 to 12 months, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Please Note: In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may experience an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. This warning from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) also says that patients of all ages taking antidepressants should be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.If you are considering taking an antidepressant and you are pregnant, planning to become pregnant, or breastfeeding, talk to your doctor about any increased health risks to you or your unborn or nursing child.To find the latest information about antidepressants, talk to your doctor and visit www.fda.gov.You may have heard about an herbal medicine called St. John's wort. Although it is a top-selling botanical product, the FDA has not approved its use as an over-the-counter or prescription medicine for depression, and there are serious concerns about its safety (it should never be combined with a prescription antidepressant) and effectiveness. Do not use St. John’s wort before talking to your health care provider. Other natural products sold as dietary supplements, including omega-3 fatty acids and S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe), remain under study but have not yet been proven safe and effective for routine use. For more information on herbal and other complementary approaches and current research, please visit the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health website.Several types of psychotherapy (also called “talk therapy” or, in a less specific form, counseling) can help people with depression. Examples of evidence-based approaches specific to the treatment of depression include cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), interpersonal therapy (IPT), and problem-solving therapy. More information on psychotherapy is available on the NIMH website and in the NIMH publication Depression: What You Need to Know.If medications do not reduce the symptoms of depression, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) may be an option to explore. Based on the latest research:Other more recently introduced types of brain stimulation therapies used to treat medicine-resistant depression include repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) and vagus nerve stimulation (VNS). Other types of brain stimulation treatments are under study. You can learn more about these therapies on the NIMH Brain Stimulation Therapies webpage.If you think you may have depression, start by making an appointment to see your doctor or health care provider. This could be your primary care practitioner or a health provider who specializes in diagnosing and treating mental health conditions. Visit the NIMH Find Help for Mental Illnesses if you are unsure of where to start.Here are other tips that may help you or a loved one during treatment for depression:Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including depression. During clinical trials, some participants receive treatments under study that might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. Other participants (in the “control group”) receive a standard treatment, such as a medication already on the market, an inactive placebo medication, or no treatment. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Doctors at NIMH are dedicated to mental health research, including clinical trials of possible new treatments as well as studies to understand the causes and effects of depression. The studies take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with one of our clinicians. Find NIMH studies currently recruiting participants with depression by visiting Join a Research Study: Depression.To search for a clinical trial near you, you can visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world (search: depression). ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial's purpose, who may participate, locations, and contact information for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.Last Revised: February 2018Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our  Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About DepressionThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDepression (major depressive disorder or clinical depression) is a common but serious mood disorder. It causes severe symptoms that affect how you feel, think, and handle daily activities, such as sleeping, eating, or working. To be diagnosed with depression, the symptoms must be present for at least two weeks.Some forms of depression are slightly different, or they may develop under unique circumstances, such as:Examples of other types of depressive disorders newly added to the diagnostic classification of DSM-5 include disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (diagnosed in children and adolescents) and premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD).If you have been experiencing some of the following signs and symptoms most of the day, nearly every day, for at least two weeks, you may be suffering from depression:Not everyone who is depressed experiences every symptom. Some people experience only a few symptoms while others may experience many. Several persistent symptoms in addition to low mood are required for a diagnosis of major depression, but people with only a few – but distressing – symptoms may benefit from treatment of their “subsyndromal” depression. The severity and frequency of symptoms and how long they last will vary depending on the individual and his or her particular illness. Symptoms may also vary depending on the stage of the illness.Depression is one of the most common mental disorders in the U.S. Current research suggests that depression is caused by a combination of genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors.Depression can happen at any age, but often begins in adulthood. Depression is now recognized as occurring in children and adolescents, although it sometimes presents with more prominent irritability than low mood. Many chronic mood and anxiety disorders in adults begin as high levels of anxiety in children.Depression, especially in midlife or older adults, can co-occur with other serious medical illnesses, such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and Parkinson’s disease. These conditions are often worse when depression is present. Sometimes medications taken for these physical illnesses may cause side effects that contribute to depression. A doctor experienced in treating these complicated illnesses can help work out the best treatment strategy.Risk factors include:Depression, even the most severe cases, can be treated. The earlier that treatment can begin, the more effective it is. Depression is usually treated with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. If these treatments do not reduce symptoms, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and other brain stimulation therapies may be options to explore.Quick Tip: No two people are affected the same way by depression and there is no "one-size-fits-all" for treatment. It may take some trial and error to find the treatment that works best for you.Antidepressants are medicines that treat depression. They may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. You may need to try several different antidepressant medicines before finding the one that improves your symptoms and has manageable side effects. A medication that has helped you or a close family member in the past will often be considered.Antidepressants take time – usually 2 to 4 weeks – to work, and often, symptoms such as sleep, appetite, and concentration problems improve before mood lifts, so it is important to give medication a chance before reaching a conclusion about its effectiveness. If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. Sometimes people taking antidepressants feel better and then stop taking the medication on their own, and the depression returns. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, usually after a course of 6 to 12 months, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Please Note: In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may experience an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. This warning from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) also says that patients of all ages taking antidepressants should be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.If you are considering taking an antidepressant and you are pregnant, planning to become pregnant, or breastfeeding, talk to your doctor about any increased health risks to you or your unborn or nursing child.To find the latest information about antidepressants, talk to your doctor and visit www.fda.gov.You may have heard about an herbal medicine called St. John's wort. Although it is a top-selling botanical product, the FDA has not approved its use as an over-the-counter or prescription medicine for depression, and there are serious concerns about its safety (it should never be combined with a prescription antidepressant) and effectiveness. Do not use St. John’s wort before talking to your health care provider. Other natural products sold as dietary supplements, including omega-3 fatty acids and S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe), remain under study but have not yet been proven safe and effective for routine use. For more information on herbal and other complementary approaches and current research, please visit the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health website.Several types of psychotherapy (also called “talk therapy” or, in a less specific form, counseling) can help people with depression. Examples of evidence-based approaches specific to the treatment of depression include cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), interpersonal therapy (IPT), and problem-solving therapy. More information on psychotherapy is available on the NIMH website and in the NIMH publication Depression: What You Need to Know.If medications do not reduce the symptoms of depression, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) may be an option to explore. Based on the latest research:Other more recently introduced types of brain stimulation therapies used to treat medicine-resistant depression include repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) and vagus nerve stimulation (VNS). Other types of brain stimulation treatments are under study. You can learn more about these therapies on the NIMH Brain Stimulation Therapies webpage.If you think you may have depression, start by making an appointment to see your doctor or health care provider. This could be your primary care practitioner or a health provider who specializes in diagnosing and treating mental health conditions. Visit the NIMH Find Help for Mental Illnesses if you are unsure of where to start.Here are other tips that may help you or a loved one during treatment for depression:Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including depression. During clinical trials, some participants receive treatments under study that might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. Other participants (in the “control group”) receive a standard treatment, such as a medication already on the market, an inactive placebo medication, or no treatment. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Doctors at NIMH are dedicated to mental health research, including clinical trials of possible new treatments as well as studies to understand the causes and effects of depression. The studies take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with one of our clinicians. Find NIMH studies currently recruiting participants with depression by visiting Join a Research Study: Depression.To search for a clinical trial near you, you can visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world (search: depression). ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial's purpose, who may participate, locations, and contact information for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.Last Revised: February 2018Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our  Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About DepressionThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuMany mental illnesses affect both men and women however men may be less likely to talk about their feelings and seek help. Recognizing the signs that someone may have a mood or mental disorder is the first step toward getting treatment and living a better life.Men and women experience many of the same mental disorders but their willingness to talk about their feelings may be very different. This is one of the reasons that their symptoms may be very different as well. For example, some men with depression or an anxiety disorder hide their emotions and may appear to be angry or aggressive while many women will express sadness. Some men may turn to drugs or alcohol to try to cope with their emotional issues. Sometimes mental health symptoms appear to be physical issues. For example, a racing heart, tightening chest, ongoing headaches, and digestive issues can be a sign of an emotional problem.Some of the mental disorders affecting men include:MorePersonal stories of men who overcame depression, from the NIMH Men and Depression awareness campaign.Short educational videos on PTSD and effective treatments the from National Center for PTSD.Series of instructional videos on symptoms, severity and treatment of traumatic brain injury (TBI).April 6, 2017 • Press ReleaseA new study shows that young people with first episode psychosis have a much higher death rate than previously thought. Researchers looked at people aged 16-30 and found that the group died at a rate at least 24 times greater than the same age group in the general population.Continue readingDecember 30, 2016 • Science UpdateMedicare’s new policy supports Collaborative Care and could improve the lives of millions of people with behavioral health conditions.Continue readingDecember 12, 2014 • Press ReleaseSoldiers hospitalized with a psychiatric disorder have a higher suicide risk in the year following discharge from the hospital.Continue readingMoreClinical trials are part of clinical research and at the heart of all medical advances. Clinical trials look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. Treatments might be new therapies, technology, drugs or combinations of drugs, or new ways to use existing treatments. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Learn more about participating in a clinical trialFor a list of trials currently recruiting participants, visit ClinicalTrials.gov.Last Revised: May 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page  for more information.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuMany mental illnesses affect both men and women however men may be less likely to talk about their feelings and seek help. Recognizing the signs that someone may have a mood or mental disorder is the first step toward getting treatment and living a better life.Men and women experience many of the same mental disorders but their willingness to talk about their feelings may be very different. This is one of the reasons that their symptoms may be very different as well. For example, some men with depression or an anxiety disorder hide their emotions and may appear to be angry or aggressive while many women will express sadness. Some men may turn to drugs or alcohol to try to cope with their emotional issues. Sometimes mental health symptoms appear to be physical issues. For example, a racing heart, tightening chest, ongoing headaches, and digestive issues can be a sign of an emotional problem.Some of the mental disorders affecting men include:MorePersonal stories of men who overcame depression, from the NIMH Men and Depression awareness campaign.Short educational videos on PTSD and effective treatments the from National Center for PTSD.Series of instructional videos on symptoms, severity and treatment of traumatic brain injury (TBI).April 6, 2017 • Press ReleaseA new study shows that young people with first episode psychosis have a much higher death rate than previously thought. Researchers looked at people aged 16-30 and found that the group died at a rate at least 24 times greater than the same age group in the general population.Continue readingDecember 30, 2016 • Science UpdateMedicare’s new policy supports Collaborative Care and could improve the lives of millions of people with behavioral health conditions.Continue readingDecember 12, 2014 • Press ReleaseSoldiers hospitalized with a psychiatric disorder have a higher suicide risk in the year following discharge from the hospital.Continue readingMoreClinical trials are part of clinical research and at the heart of all medical advances. Clinical trials look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions. Treatments might be new therapies, technology, drugs or combinations of drugs, or new ways to use existing treatments. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Learn more about participating in a clinical trialFor a list of trials currently recruiting participants, visit ClinicalTrials.gov.Last Revised: May 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page  for more information.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDepression (major depressive disorder or clinical depression) is a common but serious mood disorder. It causes severe symptoms that affect how you feel, think, and handle daily activities, such as sleeping, eating, or working. To be diagnosed with depression, the symptoms must be present for at least two weeks.Some forms of depression are slightly different, or they may develop under unique circumstances, such as:Examples of other types of depressive disorders newly added to the diagnostic classification of DSM-5 include disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (diagnosed in children and adolescents) and premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD).If you have been experiencing some of the following signs and symptoms most of the day, nearly every day, for at least two weeks, you may be suffering from depression:Not everyone who is depressed experiences every symptom. Some people experience only a few symptoms while others may experience many. Several persistent symptoms in addition to low mood are required for a diagnosis of major depression, but people with only a few – but distressing – symptoms may benefit from treatment of their “subsyndromal” depression. The severity and frequency of symptoms and how long they last will vary depending on the individual and his or her particular illness. Symptoms may also vary depending on the stage of the illness.Depression is one of the most common mental disorders in the U.S. Current research suggests that depression is caused by a combination of genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors.Depression can happen at any age, but often begins in adulthood. Depression is now recognized as occurring in children and adolescents, although it sometimes presents with more prominent irritability than low mood. Many chronic mood and anxiety disorders in adults begin as high levels of anxiety in children.Depression, especially in midlife or older adults, can co-occur with other serious medical illnesses, such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and Parkinson’s disease. These conditions are often worse when depression is present. Sometimes medications taken for these physical illnesses may cause side effects that contribute to depression. A doctor experienced in treating these complicated illnesses can help work out the best treatment strategy.Risk factors include:Depression, even the most severe cases, can be treated. The earlier that treatment can begin, the more effective it is. Depression is usually treated with medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. If these treatments do not reduce symptoms, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and other brain stimulation therapies may be options to explore.Quick Tip: No two people are affected the same way by depression and there is no "one-size-fits-all" for treatment. It may take some trial and error to find the treatment that works best for you.Antidepressants are medicines that treat depression. They may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. You may need to try several different antidepressant medicines before finding the one that improves your symptoms and has manageable side effects. A medication that has helped you or a close family member in the past will often be considered.Antidepressants take time – usually 2 to 4 weeks – to work, and often, symptoms such as sleep, appetite, and concentration problems improve before mood lifts, so it is important to give medication a chance before reaching a conclusion about its effectiveness. If you begin taking antidepressants, do not stop taking them without the help of a doctor. Sometimes people taking antidepressants feel better and then stop taking the medication on their own, and the depression returns. When you and your doctor have decided it is time to stop the medication, usually after a course of 6 to 12 months, the doctor will help you slowly and safely decrease your dose. Stopping them abruptly can cause withdrawal symptoms.Please Note: In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may experience an increase in suicidal thoughts or behavior when taking antidepressants, especially in the first few weeks after starting or when the dose is changed. This warning from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) also says that patients of all ages taking antidepressants should be watched closely, especially during the first few weeks of treatment.If you are considering taking an antidepressant and you are pregnant, planning to become pregnant, or breastfeeding, talk to your doctor about any increased health risks to you or your unborn or nursing child.To find the latest information about antidepressants, talk to your doctor and visit www.fda.gov.You may have heard about an herbal medicine called St. John's wort. Although it is a top-selling botanical product, the FDA has not approved its use as an over-the-counter or prescription medicine for depression, and there are serious concerns about its safety (it should never be combined with a prescription antidepressant) and effectiveness. Do not use St. John’s wort before talking to your health care provider. Other natural products sold as dietary supplements, including omega-3 fatty acids and S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe), remain under study but have not yet been proven safe and effective for routine use. For more information on herbal and other complementary approaches and current research, please visit the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health website.Several types of psychotherapy (also called “talk therapy” or, in a less specific form, counseling) can help people with depression. Examples of evidence-based approaches specific to the treatment of depression include cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), interpersonal therapy (IPT), and problem-solving therapy. More information on psychotherapy is available on the NIMH website and in the NIMH publication Depression: What You Need to Know.If medications do not reduce the symptoms of depression, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) may be an option to explore. Based on the latest research:Other more recently introduced types of brain stimulation therapies used to treat medicine-resistant depression include repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) and vagus nerve stimulation (VNS). Other types of brain stimulation treatments are under study. You can learn more about these therapies on the NIMH Brain Stimulation Therapies webpage.If you think you may have depression, start by making an appointment to see your doctor or health care provider. This could be your primary care practitioner or a health provider who specializes in diagnosing and treating mental health conditions. Visit the NIMH Find Help for Mental Illnesses if you are unsure of where to start.Here are other tips that may help you or a loved one during treatment for depression:Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including depression. During clinical trials, some participants receive treatments under study that might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. Other participants (in the “control group”) receive a standard treatment, such as a medication already on the market, an inactive placebo medication, or no treatment. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Doctors at NIMH are dedicated to mental health research, including clinical trials of possible new treatments as well as studies to understand the causes and effects of depression. The studies take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with one of our clinicians. Find NIMH studies currently recruiting participants with depression by visiting Join a Research Study: Depression.To search for a clinical trial near you, you can visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world (search: depression). ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial's purpose, who may participate, locations, and contact information for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.Last Revised: February 2018Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our  Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About DepressionThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDepression is a serious but treatable medical condition -- a brain disease -- that can strike anyone, including men. In America alone, more than 6 million men have depression each year.Whether you're a company executive, a construction worker, a writer, a police officer, or a student; whether you are rich or poor; surrounded by loved ones or alone; you are not immune to depression. Some factors, however, such as family history, undue stress, the loss of a loved one, or serious illnesses can make you more vulnerable.If left untreated, depression can lead to personal, family, and financial difficulties. With appropriate diagnosis and treatment, however, most people recover. The darkness disappears, hope for the future returns, and energy and interest in life becomes stronger than ever.Learn more about depression.Men are less likely than women to recognize, acknowledge, and seek treatment for depression. To address this concern, NIMH launched the Real Men. Real Depression. campaign to educate the public about depression in men. The campaign, which ran from 2003 through 2005, became one of the nation’s first formal public efforts to raise awareness on the topic.As part of the campaign, documentary filmmaker Leslie Wiener captured men speaking candidly about their experiences with depression. Personal accounts from a wide spectrum of men—a retired U.S. Air Force First Sergeant, a firefighter, a writer, a publisher, a national diving champion, a lawyer, a police officer, a student, and others—became the Real Stories of Depression video series.LawyerFirefighterMarketing ExecutiveFirst Sergeant, U.S. Air Force, RetiredPolice OfficerCollege StudentEspañolNational Diving ChampionWriterTrauma and Recovery SpecialistThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuMen are less likely than women to recognize, acknowledge, and seek treatment for depression. In addition, because men may appear to be angry or aggressive instead of sad, their loved ones and even their physicians may not always recognize depression symptoms. To address this concern, the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) launched the Real Men. Real Depression. campaign to educate the public about depression in men. The campaign, which ran from 2003 through 2005, became one of the nation’s first formal public efforts to raise awareness on the topic.With permission from all participants, documentary filmmaker Leslie Wiener captured men speaking candidly about their experiences with depression. Personal accounts from a wide spectrum of men—a retired U.S. Air Force First Sergeant, a firefighter, a writer, a publisher, a national diving champion, a lawyer, a police officer, a student, and others—became the Real Stories of Depression video series.In addition to the Real Stories of Depression videos, the resources and materials created for the Real Men. Real Depression. campaign included radio and television public service announcements (PSAs), brochures, fact sheets, a web site, and telephone and email hotlines. During the campaign’s three-year run, NIMH distributed nearly one million copies of these resources and over 150,000 copies were downloaded from the website. In addition, the campaign’s outreach effort generated 14 million hits to the web site and nearly 5,000 emails and phone calls to the information hotlines. By sharing their personal stories of depression, treatment, and recovery, these men helped NIMH increase public awareness and made a powerful contribution to help other men recognize depression.Men and Depression: Men and women may experience depression very differently. This brochure describes common signs and symptoms, and treatment options for depression in men. This free publication is available in English and en Español.Additional free brochures and booklets about depression are available as well.Real Stories of Depression: In these videos, men of different ages, backgrounds, races and ethnicities talk about their experiences with depression.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuPTSD is a disorder that develops in some people who have experienced a shocking, scary, or dangerous event.It is natural to feel afraid during and after a traumatic situation. Fear triggers many split-second changes in the body to help defend against danger or to avoid it. This “fight-or-flight” response is a typical reaction meant to protect a person from harm. Nearly everyone will experience a range of reactions after trauma, yet most people recover from initial symptoms naturally. Those who continue to experience problems may be diagnosed with PTSD. People who have PTSD may feel stressed or frightened even when they are not in danger.Not every traumatized person develops ongoing (chronic) or even short-term (acute) PTSD. Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some experiences, like the sudden, unexpected death of a loved one, can also cause PTSD. Symptoms usually begin early, within 3 months of the traumatic incident, but sometimes they begin years afterward. Symptoms must last more than a month and be severe enough to interfere with relationships or work to be considered PTSD. The course of the illness varies. Some people recover within 6 months, while others have symptoms that last much longer. In some people, the condition becomes chronic.A doctor who has experience helping people with mental illnesses, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist, can diagnose PTSD.To be diagnosed with PTSD, an adult must have all of the following for at least 1 month:Re-experiencing symptoms may cause problems in a person’s everyday routine. The symptoms can start from the person’s own thoughts and feelings. Words, objects, or situations that are reminders of the event can also trigger re-experiencing symptoms.Things that remind a person of the traumatic event can trigger avoidance symptoms. These symptoms may cause a person to change his or her personal routine. For example, after a bad car accident, a person who usually drives may avoid driving or riding in a car.Arousal symptoms are usually constant, instead of being triggered by things that remind one of the traumatic events. These symptoms can make the person feel stressed and angry. They may make it hard to do daily tasks, such as sleeping, eating, or concentrating.Cognition and mood symptoms can begin or worsen after the traumatic event, but are not due to injury or substance use. These symptoms can make the person feel alienated or detached from friends or family members.It is natural to have some of these symptoms after a dangerous event. Sometimes people have very serious symptoms that go away after a few weeks. This is called acute stress disorder, or ASD. When the symptoms last more than a month, seriously affect one’s ability to function, and are not due to substance use, medical illness, or anything except the event itself, they might be PTSD. Some people with PTSD don’t show any symptoms for weeks or months. PTSD is often accompanied by depression, substance abuse, or one or more of the other anxiety disorders.Children and teens can have extreme reactions to trauma, but their symptoms may not be the same as adults. In very young children (less than 6 years of age), these symptoms can include:Older children and teens are more likely to show symptoms similar to those seen in adults. They may also develop disruptive, disrespectful, or destructive behaviors. Older children and teens may feel guilty for not preventing injury or deaths. They may also have thoughts of revenge. For additional information, visit the Learn More section below. The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) offers free print materials in English and Spanish. These can be read online, downloaded, or delivered to you in the mail.Anyone can develop PTSD at any age. This includes war veterans, children, and people who have been through a physical or sexual assault, abuse, accident, disaster, or many other serious events. According to the National Center for PTSD, about 7 or 8 out of every 100 people will experience PTSD at some point in their lives. Women are more likely to develop PTSD than men, and genes may make some people more likely to develop PTSD than others.Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some people develop PTSD after a friend or family member experiences danger or harm. The sudden, unexpected death of a loved one can also lead to PTSD.It is important to remember that not everyone who lives through a dangerous event develops PTSD. In fact, most people will not develop the disorder.Many factors play a part in whether a person will develop PTSD. Some examples are listed below. Risk factors make a person more likely to develop PTSD. Other factors, called resilience factors, can help reduce the risk of the disorder.Some factors that increase risk for PTSD include:Some resilience factors that may reduce the risk of PTSD include:Researchers are studying the importance of these and other risk and resilience factors, including genetics and neurobiology. With more research, someday it may be possible to predict who is likely to develop PTSD and to prevent it.The main treatments for people with PTSD are medications, psychotherapy (“talk” therapy), or both. Everyone is different, and PTSD affects people differently so a treatment that works for one person may not work for another. It is important for anyone with PTSD to be treated by a mental health provider who is experienced with PTSD. Some people with PTSD need to try different treatments to find what works for their symptoms.If someone with PTSD is going through an ongoing trauma, such as being in an abusive relationship, both of the problems need to be addressed. Other ongoing problems can include panic disorder, depression, substance abuse, and feeling suicidal.The most studied medications for treating PTSD include antidepressants, which may help control PTSD symptoms such as sadness, worry, anger, and feeling numb inside. Antidepressants and other medications may be prescribed along with psychotherapy. Other medications may be helpful for specific PTSD symptoms. For example, although it is not currently FDA approved, research has shown that Prazosin may be helpful with sleep problems, particularly nightmares, commonly experienced by people with PTSD.Doctors and patients can work together to find the best medication or medication combination, as well as the right dose. Check the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website (http://www.fda.gov/) for the latest information on patient medication guides, warnings, or newly approved medications.Psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk therapy”) involves talking with a mental health professional to treat a mental illness. Psychotherapy can occur one-on-one or in a group. Talk therapy treatment for PTSD usually lasts 6 to 12 weeks, but it can last longer. Research shows that support from family and friends can be an important part of recovery.Many types of psychotherapy can help people with PTSD. Some types target the symptoms of PTSD directly. Other therapies focus on social, family, or job-related problems. The doctor or therapist may combine different therapies depending on each person’s needs.Effective psychotherapies tend to emphasize a few key components, including education about symptoms, teaching skills to help identify the triggers of symptoms, and skills to manage the symptoms. One helpful form of therapy is called cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT. CBT can include:There are other types of treatment that can help as well. People with PTSD should talk about all treatment options with a therapist. Treatment should equip individuals with the skills to manage their symptoms and help them participate in activities that they enjoyed before developing PTSD.How Talk Therapies Help People Overcome PTSD  Talk therapies teach people helpful ways to react to the frightening events that trigger their PTSD symptoms. Based on this general goal, different types of therapy may:It may be very hard to take that first step to help yourself. It is important to realize that although it may take some time, with treatment, you can get better. If you are unsure where to go for help, ask your family doctor. You can also check NIMH's Help for Mental Illnesses page or search online for “mental health providers,” “social services,” “hotlines,” or “physicians” for phone numbers and addresses. An emergency room doctor can also provide temporary help and can tell you where and how to get further help. To help yourself while in treatment:Caring for yourself and others is especially important when large numbers of people are exposed to traumatic events (such as natural disasters, accidents, and violent acts). For more information, see the Learn More section, below.In the last decade, progress in research on the mental and biological foundations of PTSD has lead scientists to focus on better understanding the underlying causes of why people experience a range of reactions to trauma.Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including PTSD. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Doctors at NIMH are dedicated to mental health research. The studies take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with one of our clinicians. Find NIH-funded studies currently recruiting participants with PTSD by using ClinicalTrials.gov (search: PTSD).To search for a clinical trial near you, you can visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial's purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers to call for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.You can download or order free copies of the following booklets and brochures in English or en Español:Last Revised: February 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About Post-Traumatic Stress DisorderThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuPTSD is a disorder that develops in some people who have experienced a shocking, scary, or dangerous event.It is natural to feel afraid during and after a traumatic situation. Fear triggers many split-second changes in the body to help defend against danger or to avoid it. This “fight-or-flight” response is a typical reaction meant to protect a person from harm. Nearly everyone will experience a range of reactions after trauma, yet most people recover from initial symptoms naturally. Those who continue to experience problems may be diagnosed with PTSD. People who have PTSD may feel stressed or frightened even when they are not in danger.Not every traumatized person develops ongoing (chronic) or even short-term (acute) PTSD. Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some experiences, like the sudden, unexpected death of a loved one, can also cause PTSD. Symptoms usually begin early, within 3 months of the traumatic incident, but sometimes they begin years afterward. Symptoms must last more than a month and be severe enough to interfere with relationships or work to be considered PTSD. The course of the illness varies. Some people recover within 6 months, while others have symptoms that last much longer. In some people, the condition becomes chronic.A doctor who has experience helping people with mental illnesses, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist, can diagnose PTSD.To be diagnosed with PTSD, an adult must have all of the following for at least 1 month:Re-experiencing symptoms may cause problems in a person’s everyday routine. The symptoms can start from the person’s own thoughts and feelings. Words, objects, or situations that are reminders of the event can also trigger re-experiencing symptoms.Things that remind a person of the traumatic event can trigger avoidance symptoms. These symptoms may cause a person to change his or her personal routine. For example, after a bad car accident, a person who usually drives may avoid driving or riding in a car.Arousal symptoms are usually constant, instead of being triggered by things that remind one of the traumatic events. These symptoms can make the person feel stressed and angry. They may make it hard to do daily tasks, such as sleeping, eating, or concentrating.Cognition and mood symptoms can begin or worsen after the traumatic event, but are not due to injury or substance use. These symptoms can make the person feel alienated or detached from friends or family members.It is natural to have some of these symptoms after a dangerous event. Sometimes people have very serious symptoms that go away after a few weeks. This is called acute stress disorder, or ASD. When the symptoms last more than a month, seriously affect one’s ability to function, and are not due to substance use, medical illness, or anything except the event itself, they might be PTSD. Some people with PTSD don’t show any symptoms for weeks or months. PTSD is often accompanied by depression, substance abuse, or one or more of the other anxiety disorders.Children and teens can have extreme reactions to trauma, but their symptoms may not be the same as adults. In very young children (less than 6 years of age), these symptoms can include:Older children and teens are more likely to show symptoms similar to those seen in adults. They may also develop disruptive, disrespectful, or destructive behaviors. Older children and teens may feel guilty for not preventing injury or deaths. They may also have thoughts of revenge. For additional information, visit the Learn More section below. The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) offers free print materials in English and Spanish. These can be read online, downloaded, or delivered to you in the mail.Anyone can develop PTSD at any age. This includes war veterans, children, and people who have been through a physical or sexual assault, abuse, accident, disaster, or many other serious events. According to the National Center for PTSD, about 7 or 8 out of every 100 people will experience PTSD at some point in their lives. Women are more likely to develop PTSD than men, and genes may make some people more likely to develop PTSD than others.Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some people develop PTSD after a friend or family member experiences danger or harm. The sudden, unexpected death of a loved one can also lead to PTSD.It is important to remember that not everyone who lives through a dangerous event develops PTSD. In fact, most people will not develop the disorder.Many factors play a part in whether a person will develop PTSD. Some examples are listed below. Risk factors make a person more likely to develop PTSD. Other factors, called resilience factors, can help reduce the risk of the disorder.Some factors that increase risk for PTSD include:Some resilience factors that may reduce the risk of PTSD include:Researchers are studying the importance of these and other risk and resilience factors, including genetics and neurobiology. With more research, someday it may be possible to predict who is likely to develop PTSD and to prevent it.The main treatments for people with PTSD are medications, psychotherapy (“talk” therapy), or both. Everyone is different, and PTSD affects people differently so a treatment that works for one person may not work for another. It is important for anyone with PTSD to be treated by a mental health provider who is experienced with PTSD. Some people with PTSD need to try different treatments to find what works for their symptoms.If someone with PTSD is going through an ongoing trauma, such as being in an abusive relationship, both of the problems need to be addressed. Other ongoing problems can include panic disorder, depression, substance abuse, and feeling suicidal.The most studied medications for treating PTSD include antidepressants, which may help control PTSD symptoms such as sadness, worry, anger, and feeling numb inside. Antidepressants and other medications may be prescribed along with psychotherapy. Other medications may be helpful for specific PTSD symptoms. For example, although it is not currently FDA approved, research has shown that Prazosin may be helpful with sleep problems, particularly nightmares, commonly experienced by people with PTSD.Doctors and patients can work together to find the best medication or medication combination, as well as the right dose. Check the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website (http://www.fda.gov/) for the latest information on patient medication guides, warnings, or newly approved medications.Psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk therapy”) involves talking with a mental health professional to treat a mental illness. Psychotherapy can occur one-on-one or in a group. Talk therapy treatment for PTSD usually lasts 6 to 12 weeks, but it can last longer. Research shows that support from family and friends can be an important part of recovery.Many types of psychotherapy can help people with PTSD. Some types target the symptoms of PTSD directly. Other therapies focus on social, family, or job-related problems. The doctor or therapist may combine different therapies depending on each person’s needs.Effective psychotherapies tend to emphasize a few key components, including education about symptoms, teaching skills to help identify the triggers of symptoms, and skills to manage the symptoms. One helpful form of therapy is called cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT. CBT can include:There are other types of treatment that can help as well. People with PTSD should talk about all treatment options with a therapist. Treatment should equip individuals with the skills to manage their symptoms and help them participate in activities that they enjoyed before developing PTSD.How Talk Therapies Help People Overcome PTSD  Talk therapies teach people helpful ways to react to the frightening events that trigger their PTSD symptoms. Based on this general goal, different types of therapy may:It may be very hard to take that first step to help yourself. It is important to realize that although it may take some time, with treatment, you can get better. If you are unsure where to go for help, ask your family doctor. You can also check NIMH's Help for Mental Illnesses page or search online for “mental health providers,” “social services,” “hotlines,” or “physicians” for phone numbers and addresses. An emergency room doctor can also provide temporary help and can tell you where and how to get further help. To help yourself while in treatment:Caring for yourself and others is especially important when large numbers of people are exposed to traumatic events (such as natural disasters, accidents, and violent acts). For more information, see the Learn More section, below.In the last decade, progress in research on the mental and biological foundations of PTSD has lead scientists to focus on better understanding the underlying causes of why people experience a range of reactions to trauma.Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including PTSD. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Doctors at NIMH are dedicated to mental health research. The studies take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with one of our clinicians. Find NIH-funded studies currently recruiting participants with PTSD by using ClinicalTrials.gov (search: PTSD).To search for a clinical trial near you, you can visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial's purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers to call for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.You can download or order free copies of the following booklets and brochures in English or en Español:Last Revised: February 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About Post-Traumatic Stress DisorderThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuPTSD is a disorder that develops in some people who have experienced a shocking, scary, or dangerous event.It is natural to feel afraid during and after a traumatic situation. Fear triggers many split-second changes in the body to help defend against danger or to avoid it. This “fight-or-flight” response is a typical reaction meant to protect a person from harm. Nearly everyone will experience a range of reactions after trauma, yet most people recover from initial symptoms naturally. Those who continue to experience problems may be diagnosed with PTSD. People who have PTSD may feel stressed or frightened even when they are not in danger.Not every traumatized person develops ongoing (chronic) or even short-term (acute) PTSD. Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some experiences, like the sudden, unexpected death of a loved one, can also cause PTSD. Symptoms usually begin early, within 3 months of the traumatic incident, but sometimes they begin years afterward. Symptoms must last more than a month and be severe enough to interfere with relationships or work to be considered PTSD. The course of the illness varies. Some people recover within 6 months, while others have symptoms that last much longer. In some people, the condition becomes chronic.A doctor who has experience helping people with mental illnesses, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist, can diagnose PTSD.To be diagnosed with PTSD, an adult must have all of the following for at least 1 month:Re-experiencing symptoms may cause problems in a person’s everyday routine. The symptoms can start from the person’s own thoughts and feelings. Words, objects, or situations that are reminders of the event can also trigger re-experiencing symptoms.Things that remind a person of the traumatic event can trigger avoidance symptoms. These symptoms may cause a person to change his or her personal routine. For example, after a bad car accident, a person who usually drives may avoid driving or riding in a car.Arousal symptoms are usually constant, instead of being triggered by things that remind one of the traumatic events. These symptoms can make the person feel stressed and angry. They may make it hard to do daily tasks, such as sleeping, eating, or concentrating.Cognition and mood symptoms can begin or worsen after the traumatic event, but are not due to injury or substance use. These symptoms can make the person feel alienated or detached from friends or family members.It is natural to have some of these symptoms after a dangerous event. Sometimes people have very serious symptoms that go away after a few weeks. This is called acute stress disorder, or ASD. When the symptoms last more than a month, seriously affect one’s ability to function, and are not due to substance use, medical illness, or anything except the event itself, they might be PTSD. Some people with PTSD don’t show any symptoms for weeks or months. PTSD is often accompanied by depression, substance abuse, or one or more of the other anxiety disorders.Children and teens can have extreme reactions to trauma, but their symptoms may not be the same as adults. In very young children (less than 6 years of age), these symptoms can include:Older children and teens are more likely to show symptoms similar to those seen in adults. They may also develop disruptive, disrespectful, or destructive behaviors. Older children and teens may feel guilty for not preventing injury or deaths. They may also have thoughts of revenge. For additional information, visit the Learn More section below. The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) offers free print materials in English and Spanish. These can be read online, downloaded, or delivered to you in the mail.Anyone can develop PTSD at any age. This includes war veterans, children, and people who have been through a physical or sexual assault, abuse, accident, disaster, or many other serious events. According to the National Center for PTSD, about 7 or 8 out of every 100 people will experience PTSD at some point in their lives. Women are more likely to develop PTSD than men, and genes may make some people more likely to develop PTSD than others.Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some people develop PTSD after a friend or family member experiences danger or harm. The sudden, unexpected death of a loved one can also lead to PTSD.It is important to remember that not everyone who lives through a dangerous event develops PTSD. In fact, most people will not develop the disorder.Many factors play a part in whether a person will develop PTSD. Some examples are listed below. Risk factors make a person more likely to develop PTSD. Other factors, called resilience factors, can help reduce the risk of the disorder.Some factors that increase risk for PTSD include:Some resilience factors that may reduce the risk of PTSD include:Researchers are studying the importance of these and other risk and resilience factors, including genetics and neurobiology. With more research, someday it may be possible to predict who is likely to develop PTSD and to prevent it.The main treatments for people with PTSD are medications, psychotherapy (“talk” therapy), or both. Everyone is different, and PTSD affects people differently so a treatment that works for one person may not work for another. It is important for anyone with PTSD to be treated by a mental health provider who is experienced with PTSD. Some people with PTSD need to try different treatments to find what works for their symptoms.If someone with PTSD is going through an ongoing trauma, such as being in an abusive relationship, both of the problems need to be addressed. Other ongoing problems can include panic disorder, depression, substance abuse, and feeling suicidal.The most studied medications for treating PTSD include antidepressants, which may help control PTSD symptoms such as sadness, worry, anger, and feeling numb inside. Antidepressants and other medications may be prescribed along with psychotherapy. Other medications may be helpful for specific PTSD symptoms. For example, although it is not currently FDA approved, research has shown that Prazosin may be helpful with sleep problems, particularly nightmares, commonly experienced by people with PTSD.Doctors and patients can work together to find the best medication or medication combination, as well as the right dose. Check the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website (http://www.fda.gov/) for the latest information on patient medication guides, warnings, or newly approved medications.Psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk therapy”) involves talking with a mental health professional to treat a mental illness. Psychotherapy can occur one-on-one or in a group. Talk therapy treatment for PTSD usually lasts 6 to 12 weeks, but it can last longer. Research shows that support from family and friends can be an important part of recovery.Many types of psychotherapy can help people with PTSD. Some types target the symptoms of PTSD directly. Other therapies focus on social, family, or job-related problems. The doctor or therapist may combine different therapies depending on each person’s needs.Effective psychotherapies tend to emphasize a few key components, including education about symptoms, teaching skills to help identify the triggers of symptoms, and skills to manage the symptoms. One helpful form of therapy is called cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT. CBT can include:There are other types of treatment that can help as well. People with PTSD should talk about all treatment options with a therapist. Treatment should equip individuals with the skills to manage their symptoms and help them participate in activities that they enjoyed before developing PTSD.How Talk Therapies Help People Overcome PTSD  Talk therapies teach people helpful ways to react to the frightening events that trigger their PTSD symptoms. Based on this general goal, different types of therapy may:It may be very hard to take that first step to help yourself. It is important to realize that although it may take some time, with treatment, you can get better. If you are unsure where to go for help, ask your family doctor. You can also check NIMH's Help for Mental Illnesses page or search online for “mental health providers,” “social services,” “hotlines,” or “physicians” for phone numbers and addresses. An emergency room doctor can also provide temporary help and can tell you where and how to get further help. To help yourself while in treatment:Caring for yourself and others is especially important when large numbers of people are exposed to traumatic events (such as natural disasters, accidents, and violent acts). For more information, see the Learn More section, below.In the last decade, progress in research on the mental and biological foundations of PTSD has lead scientists to focus on better understanding the underlying causes of why people experience a range of reactions to trauma.Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including PTSD. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Doctors at NIMH are dedicated to mental health research. The studies take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with one of our clinicians. Find NIH-funded studies currently recruiting participants with PTSD by using ClinicalTrials.gov (search: PTSD).To search for a clinical trial near you, you can visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial's purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers to call for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.You can download or order free copies of the following booklets and brochures in English or en Español:Last Revised: February 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About Post-Traumatic Stress DisorderThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuPTSD is a disorder that develops in some people who have experienced a shocking, scary, or dangerous event.It is natural to feel afraid during and after a traumatic situation. Fear triggers many split-second changes in the body to help defend against danger or to avoid it. This “fight-or-flight” response is a typical reaction meant to protect a person from harm. Nearly everyone will experience a range of reactions after trauma, yet most people recover from initial symptoms naturally. Those who continue to experience problems may be diagnosed with PTSD. People who have PTSD may feel stressed or frightened even when they are not in danger.Not every traumatized person develops ongoing (chronic) or even short-term (acute) PTSD. Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some experiences, like the sudden, unexpected death of a loved one, can also cause PTSD. Symptoms usually begin early, within 3 months of the traumatic incident, but sometimes they begin years afterward. Symptoms must last more than a month and be severe enough to interfere with relationships or work to be considered PTSD. The course of the illness varies. Some people recover within 6 months, while others have symptoms that last much longer. In some people, the condition becomes chronic.A doctor who has experience helping people with mental illnesses, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist, can diagnose PTSD.To be diagnosed with PTSD, an adult must have all of the following for at least 1 month:Re-experiencing symptoms may cause problems in a person’s everyday routine. The symptoms can start from the person’s own thoughts and feelings. Words, objects, or situations that are reminders of the event can also trigger re-experiencing symptoms.Things that remind a person of the traumatic event can trigger avoidance symptoms. These symptoms may cause a person to change his or her personal routine. For example, after a bad car accident, a person who usually drives may avoid driving or riding in a car.Arousal symptoms are usually constant, instead of being triggered by things that remind one of the traumatic events. These symptoms can make the person feel stressed and angry. They may make it hard to do daily tasks, such as sleeping, eating, or concentrating.Cognition and mood symptoms can begin or worsen after the traumatic event, but are not due to injury or substance use. These symptoms can make the person feel alienated or detached from friends or family members.It is natural to have some of these symptoms after a dangerous event. Sometimes people have very serious symptoms that go away after a few weeks. This is called acute stress disorder, or ASD. When the symptoms last more than a month, seriously affect one’s ability to function, and are not due to substance use, medical illness, or anything except the event itself, they might be PTSD. Some people with PTSD don’t show any symptoms for weeks or months. PTSD is often accompanied by depression, substance abuse, or one or more of the other anxiety disorders.Children and teens can have extreme reactions to trauma, but their symptoms may not be the same as adults. In very young children (less than 6 years of age), these symptoms can include:Older children and teens are more likely to show symptoms similar to those seen in adults. They may also develop disruptive, disrespectful, or destructive behaviors. Older children and teens may feel guilty for not preventing injury or deaths. They may also have thoughts of revenge. For additional information, visit the Learn More section below. The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) offers free print materials in English and Spanish. These can be read online, downloaded, or delivered to you in the mail.Anyone can develop PTSD at any age. This includes war veterans, children, and people who have been through a physical or sexual assault, abuse, accident, disaster, or many other serious events. According to the National Center for PTSD, about 7 or 8 out of every 100 people will experience PTSD at some point in their lives. Women are more likely to develop PTSD than men, and genes may make some people more likely to develop PTSD than others.Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some people develop PTSD after a friend or family member experiences danger or harm. The sudden, unexpected death of a loved one can also lead to PTSD.It is important to remember that not everyone who lives through a dangerous event develops PTSD. In fact, most people will not develop the disorder.Many factors play a part in whether a person will develop PTSD. Some examples are listed below. Risk factors make a person more likely to develop PTSD. Other factors, called resilience factors, can help reduce the risk of the disorder.Some factors that increase risk for PTSD include:Some resilience factors that may reduce the risk of PTSD include:Researchers are studying the importance of these and other risk and resilience factors, including genetics and neurobiology. With more research, someday it may be possible to predict who is likely to develop PTSD and to prevent it.The main treatments for people with PTSD are medications, psychotherapy (“talk” therapy), or both. Everyone is different, and PTSD affects people differently so a treatment that works for one person may not work for another. It is important for anyone with PTSD to be treated by a mental health provider who is experienced with PTSD. Some people with PTSD need to try different treatments to find what works for their symptoms.If someone with PTSD is going through an ongoing trauma, such as being in an abusive relationship, both of the problems need to be addressed. Other ongoing problems can include panic disorder, depression, substance abuse, and feeling suicidal.The most studied medications for treating PTSD include antidepressants, which may help control PTSD symptoms such as sadness, worry, anger, and feeling numb inside. Antidepressants and other medications may be prescribed along with psychotherapy. Other medications may be helpful for specific PTSD symptoms. For example, although it is not currently FDA approved, research has shown that Prazosin may be helpful with sleep problems, particularly nightmares, commonly experienced by people with PTSD.Doctors and patients can work together to find the best medication or medication combination, as well as the right dose. Check the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website (http://www.fda.gov/) for the latest information on patient medication guides, warnings, or newly approved medications.Psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk therapy”) involves talking with a mental health professional to treat a mental illness. Psychotherapy can occur one-on-one or in a group. Talk therapy treatment for PTSD usually lasts 6 to 12 weeks, but it can last longer. Research shows that support from family and friends can be an important part of recovery.Many types of psychotherapy can help people with PTSD. Some types target the symptoms of PTSD directly. Other therapies focus on social, family, or job-related problems. The doctor or therapist may combine different therapies depending on each person’s needs.Effective psychotherapies tend to emphasize a few key components, including education about symptoms, teaching skills to help identify the triggers of symptoms, and skills to manage the symptoms. One helpful form of therapy is called cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT. CBT can include:There are other types of treatment that can help as well. People with PTSD should talk about all treatment options with a therapist. Treatment should equip individuals with the skills to manage their symptoms and help them participate in activities that they enjoyed before developing PTSD.How Talk Therapies Help People Overcome PTSD  Talk therapies teach people helpful ways to react to the frightening events that trigger their PTSD symptoms. Based on this general goal, different types of therapy may:It may be very hard to take that first step to help yourself. It is important to realize that although it may take some time, with treatment, you can get better. If you are unsure where to go for help, ask your family doctor. You can also check NIMH's Help for Mental Illnesses page or search online for “mental health providers,” “social services,” “hotlines,” or “physicians” for phone numbers and addresses. An emergency room doctor can also provide temporary help and can tell you where and how to get further help. To help yourself while in treatment:Caring for yourself and others is especially important when large numbers of people are exposed to traumatic events (such as natural disasters, accidents, and violent acts). For more information, see the Learn More section, below.In the last decade, progress in research on the mental and biological foundations of PTSD has lead scientists to focus on better understanding the underlying causes of why people experience a range of reactions to trauma.Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including PTSD. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Doctors at NIMH are dedicated to mental health research. The studies take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with one of our clinicians. Find NIH-funded studies currently recruiting participants with PTSD by using ClinicalTrials.gov (search: PTSD).To search for a clinical trial near you, you can visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial's purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers to call for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.You can download or order free copies of the following booklets and brochures in English or en Español:Last Revised: February 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About Post-Traumatic Stress DisorderThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuPTSD is a disorder that develops in some people who have experienced a shocking, scary, or dangerous event.It is natural to feel afraid during and after a traumatic situation. Fear triggers many split-second changes in the body to help defend against danger or to avoid it. This “fight-or-flight” response is a typical reaction meant to protect a person from harm. Nearly everyone will experience a range of reactions after trauma, yet most people recover from initial symptoms naturally. Those who continue to experience problems may be diagnosed with PTSD. People who have PTSD may feel stressed or frightened even when they are not in danger.Not every traumatized person develops ongoing (chronic) or even short-term (acute) PTSD. Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some experiences, like the sudden, unexpected death of a loved one, can also cause PTSD. Symptoms usually begin early, within 3 months of the traumatic incident, but sometimes they begin years afterward. Symptoms must last more than a month and be severe enough to interfere with relationships or work to be considered PTSD. The course of the illness varies. Some people recover within 6 months, while others have symptoms that last much longer. In some people, the condition becomes chronic.A doctor who has experience helping people with mental illnesses, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist, can diagnose PTSD.To be diagnosed with PTSD, an adult must have all of the following for at least 1 month:Re-experiencing symptoms may cause problems in a person’s everyday routine. The symptoms can start from the person’s own thoughts and feelings. Words, objects, or situations that are reminders of the event can also trigger re-experiencing symptoms.Things that remind a person of the traumatic event can trigger avoidance symptoms. These symptoms may cause a person to change his or her personal routine. For example, after a bad car accident, a person who usually drives may avoid driving or riding in a car.Arousal symptoms are usually constant, instead of being triggered by things that remind one of the traumatic events. These symptoms can make the person feel stressed and angry. They may make it hard to do daily tasks, such as sleeping, eating, or concentrating.Cognition and mood symptoms can begin or worsen after the traumatic event, but are not due to injury or substance use. These symptoms can make the person feel alienated or detached from friends or family members.It is natural to have some of these symptoms after a dangerous event. Sometimes people have very serious symptoms that go away after a few weeks. This is called acute stress disorder, or ASD. When the symptoms last more than a month, seriously affect one’s ability to function, and are not due to substance use, medical illness, or anything except the event itself, they might be PTSD. Some people with PTSD don’t show any symptoms for weeks or months. PTSD is often accompanied by depression, substance abuse, or one or more of the other anxiety disorders.Children and teens can have extreme reactions to trauma, but their symptoms may not be the same as adults. In very young children (less than 6 years of age), these symptoms can include:Older children and teens are more likely to show symptoms similar to those seen in adults. They may also develop disruptive, disrespectful, or destructive behaviors. Older children and teens may feel guilty for not preventing injury or deaths. They may also have thoughts of revenge. For additional information, visit the Learn More section below. The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) offers free print materials in English and Spanish. These can be read online, downloaded, or delivered to you in the mail.Anyone can develop PTSD at any age. This includes war veterans, children, and people who have been through a physical or sexual assault, abuse, accident, disaster, or many other serious events. According to the National Center for PTSD, about 7 or 8 out of every 100 people will experience PTSD at some point in their lives. Women are more likely to develop PTSD than men, and genes may make some people more likely to develop PTSD than others.Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some people develop PTSD after a friend or family member experiences danger or harm. The sudden, unexpected death of a loved one can also lead to PTSD.It is important to remember that not everyone who lives through a dangerous event develops PTSD. In fact, most people will not develop the disorder.Many factors play a part in whether a person will develop PTSD. Some examples are listed below. Risk factors make a person more likely to develop PTSD. Other factors, called resilience factors, can help reduce the risk of the disorder.Some factors that increase risk for PTSD include:Some resilience factors that may reduce the risk of PTSD include:Researchers are studying the importance of these and other risk and resilience factors, including genetics and neurobiology. With more research, someday it may be possible to predict who is likely to develop PTSD and to prevent it.The main treatments for people with PTSD are medications, psychotherapy (“talk” therapy), or both. Everyone is different, and PTSD affects people differently so a treatment that works for one person may not work for another. It is important for anyone with PTSD to be treated by a mental health provider who is experienced with PTSD. Some people with PTSD need to try different treatments to find what works for their symptoms.If someone with PTSD is going through an ongoing trauma, such as being in an abusive relationship, both of the problems need to be addressed. Other ongoing problems can include panic disorder, depression, substance abuse, and feeling suicidal.The most studied medications for treating PTSD include antidepressants, which may help control PTSD symptoms such as sadness, worry, anger, and feeling numb inside. Antidepressants and other medications may be prescribed along with psychotherapy. Other medications may be helpful for specific PTSD symptoms. For example, although it is not currently FDA approved, research has shown that Prazosin may be helpful with sleep problems, particularly nightmares, commonly experienced by people with PTSD.Doctors and patients can work together to find the best medication or medication combination, as well as the right dose. Check the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website (http://www.fda.gov/) for the latest information on patient medication guides, warnings, or newly approved medications.Psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk therapy”) involves talking with a mental health professional to treat a mental illness. Psychotherapy can occur one-on-one or in a group. Talk therapy treatment for PTSD usually lasts 6 to 12 weeks, but it can last longer. Research shows that support from family and friends can be an important part of recovery.Many types of psychotherapy can help people with PTSD. Some types target the symptoms of PTSD directly. Other therapies focus on social, family, or job-related problems. The doctor or therapist may combine different therapies depending on each person’s needs.Effective psychotherapies tend to emphasize a few key components, including education about symptoms, teaching skills to help identify the triggers of symptoms, and skills to manage the symptoms. One helpful form of therapy is called cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT. CBT can include:There are other types of treatment that can help as well. People with PTSD should talk about all treatment options with a therapist. Treatment should equip individuals with the skills to manage their symptoms and help them participate in activities that they enjoyed before developing PTSD.How Talk Therapies Help People Overcome PTSD  Talk therapies teach people helpful ways to react to the frightening events that trigger their PTSD symptoms. Based on this general goal, different types of therapy may:It may be very hard to take that first step to help yourself. It is important to realize that although it may take some time, with treatment, you can get better. If you are unsure where to go for help, ask your family doctor. You can also check NIMH's Help for Mental Illnesses page or search online for “mental health providers,” “social services,” “hotlines,” or “physicians” for phone numbers and addresses. An emergency room doctor can also provide temporary help and can tell you where and how to get further help. To help yourself while in treatment:Caring for yourself and others is especially important when large numbers of people are exposed to traumatic events (such as natural disasters, accidents, and violent acts). For more information, see the Learn More section, below.In the last decade, progress in research on the mental and biological foundations of PTSD has lead scientists to focus on better understanding the underlying causes of why people experience a range of reactions to trauma.Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including PTSD. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Doctors at NIMH are dedicated to mental health research. The studies take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with one of our clinicians. Find NIH-funded studies currently recruiting participants with PTSD by using ClinicalTrials.gov (search: PTSD).To search for a clinical trial near you, you can visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial's purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers to call for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.You can download or order free copies of the following booklets and brochures in English or en Español:Last Revised: February 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About Post-Traumatic Stress DisorderThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuPTSD is a disorder that develops in some people who have experienced a shocking, scary, or dangerous event.It is natural to feel afraid during and after a traumatic situation. Fear triggers many split-second changes in the body to help defend against danger or to avoid it. This “fight-or-flight” response is a typical reaction meant to protect a person from harm. Nearly everyone will experience a range of reactions after trauma, yet most people recover from initial symptoms naturally. Those who continue to experience problems may be diagnosed with PTSD. People who have PTSD may feel stressed or frightened even when they are not in danger.Not every traumatized person develops ongoing (chronic) or even short-term (acute) PTSD. Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some experiences, like the sudden, unexpected death of a loved one, can also cause PTSD. Symptoms usually begin early, within 3 months of the traumatic incident, but sometimes they begin years afterward. Symptoms must last more than a month and be severe enough to interfere with relationships or work to be considered PTSD. The course of the illness varies. Some people recover within 6 months, while others have symptoms that last much longer. In some people, the condition becomes chronic.A doctor who has experience helping people with mental illnesses, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist, can diagnose PTSD.To be diagnosed with PTSD, an adult must have all of the following for at least 1 month:Re-experiencing symptoms may cause problems in a person’s everyday routine. The symptoms can start from the person’s own thoughts and feelings. Words, objects, or situations that are reminders of the event can also trigger re-experiencing symptoms.Things that remind a person of the traumatic event can trigger avoidance symptoms. These symptoms may cause a person to change his or her personal routine. For example, after a bad car accident, a person who usually drives may avoid driving or riding in a car.Arousal symptoms are usually constant, instead of being triggered by things that remind one of the traumatic events. These symptoms can make the person feel stressed and angry. They may make it hard to do daily tasks, such as sleeping, eating, or concentrating.Cognition and mood symptoms can begin or worsen after the traumatic event, but are not due to injury or substance use. These symptoms can make the person feel alienated or detached from friends or family members.It is natural to have some of these symptoms after a dangerous event. Sometimes people have very serious symptoms that go away after a few weeks. This is called acute stress disorder, or ASD. When the symptoms last more than a month, seriously affect one’s ability to function, and are not due to substance use, medical illness, or anything except the event itself, they might be PTSD. Some people with PTSD don’t show any symptoms for weeks or months. PTSD is often accompanied by depression, substance abuse, or one or more of the other anxiety disorders.Children and teens can have extreme reactions to trauma, but their symptoms may not be the same as adults. In very young children (less than 6 years of age), these symptoms can include:Older children and teens are more likely to show symptoms similar to those seen in adults. They may also develop disruptive, disrespectful, or destructive behaviors. Older children and teens may feel guilty for not preventing injury or deaths. They may also have thoughts of revenge. For additional information, visit the Learn More section below. The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) offers free print materials in English and Spanish. These can be read online, downloaded, or delivered to you in the mail.Anyone can develop PTSD at any age. This includes war veterans, children, and people who have been through a physical or sexual assault, abuse, accident, disaster, or many other serious events. According to the National Center for PTSD, about 7 or 8 out of every 100 people will experience PTSD at some point in their lives. Women are more likely to develop PTSD than men, and genes may make some people more likely to develop PTSD than others.Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some people develop PTSD after a friend or family member experiences danger or harm. The sudden, unexpected death of a loved one can also lead to PTSD.It is important to remember that not everyone who lives through a dangerous event develops PTSD. In fact, most people will not develop the disorder.Many factors play a part in whether a person will develop PTSD. Some examples are listed below. Risk factors make a person more likely to develop PTSD. Other factors, called resilience factors, can help reduce the risk of the disorder.Some factors that increase risk for PTSD include:Some resilience factors that may reduce the risk of PTSD include:Researchers are studying the importance of these and other risk and resilience factors, including genetics and neurobiology. With more research, someday it may be possible to predict who is likely to develop PTSD and to prevent it.The main treatments for people with PTSD are medications, psychotherapy (“talk” therapy), or both. Everyone is different, and PTSD affects people differently so a treatment that works for one person may not work for another. It is important for anyone with PTSD to be treated by a mental health provider who is experienced with PTSD. Some people with PTSD need to try different treatments to find what works for their symptoms.If someone with PTSD is going through an ongoing trauma, such as being in an abusive relationship, both of the problems need to be addressed. Other ongoing problems can include panic disorder, depression, substance abuse, and feeling suicidal.The most studied medications for treating PTSD include antidepressants, which may help control PTSD symptoms such as sadness, worry, anger, and feeling numb inside. Antidepressants and other medications may be prescribed along with psychotherapy. Other medications may be helpful for specific PTSD symptoms. For example, although it is not currently FDA approved, research has shown that Prazosin may be helpful with sleep problems, particularly nightmares, commonly experienced by people with PTSD.Doctors and patients can work together to find the best medication or medication combination, as well as the right dose. Check the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website (http://www.fda.gov/) for the latest information on patient medication guides, warnings, or newly approved medications.Psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk therapy”) involves talking with a mental health professional to treat a mental illness. Psychotherapy can occur one-on-one or in a group. Talk therapy treatment for PTSD usually lasts 6 to 12 weeks, but it can last longer. Research shows that support from family and friends can be an important part of recovery.Many types of psychotherapy can help people with PTSD. Some types target the symptoms of PTSD directly. Other therapies focus on social, family, or job-related problems. The doctor or therapist may combine different therapies depending on each person’s needs.Effective psychotherapies tend to emphasize a few key components, including education about symptoms, teaching skills to help identify the triggers of symptoms, and skills to manage the symptoms. One helpful form of therapy is called cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT. CBT can include:There are other types of treatment that can help as well. People with PTSD should talk about all treatment options with a therapist. Treatment should equip individuals with the skills to manage their symptoms and help them participate in activities that they enjoyed before developing PTSD.How Talk Therapies Help People Overcome PTSD  Talk therapies teach people helpful ways to react to the frightening events that trigger their PTSD symptoms. Based on this general goal, different types of therapy may:It may be very hard to take that first step to help yourself. It is important to realize that although it may take some time, with treatment, you can get better. If you are unsure where to go for help, ask your family doctor. You can also check NIMH's Help for Mental Illnesses page or search online for “mental health providers,” “social services,” “hotlines,” or “physicians” for phone numbers and addresses. An emergency room doctor can also provide temporary help and can tell you where and how to get further help. To help yourself while in treatment:Caring for yourself and others is especially important when large numbers of people are exposed to traumatic events (such as natural disasters, accidents, and violent acts). For more information, see the Learn More section, below.In the last decade, progress in research on the mental and biological foundations of PTSD has lead scientists to focus on better understanding the underlying causes of why people experience a range of reactions to trauma.Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including PTSD. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Doctors at NIMH are dedicated to mental health research. The studies take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with one of our clinicians. Find NIH-funded studies currently recruiting participants with PTSD by using ClinicalTrials.gov (search: PTSD).To search for a clinical trial near you, you can visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial's purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers to call for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.You can download or order free copies of the following booklets and brochures in English or en Español:Last Revised: February 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About Post-Traumatic Stress DisorderThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuPTSD is a disorder that develops in some people who have experienced a shocking, scary, or dangerous event.It is natural to feel afraid during and after a traumatic situation. Fear triggers many split-second changes in the body to help defend against danger or to avoid it. This “fight-or-flight” response is a typical reaction meant to protect a person from harm. Nearly everyone will experience a range of reactions after trauma, yet most people recover from initial symptoms naturally. Those who continue to experience problems may be diagnosed with PTSD. People who have PTSD may feel stressed or frightened even when they are not in danger.Not every traumatized person develops ongoing (chronic) or even short-term (acute) PTSD. Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some experiences, like the sudden, unexpected death of a loved one, can also cause PTSD. Symptoms usually begin early, within 3 months of the traumatic incident, but sometimes they begin years afterward. Symptoms must last more than a month and be severe enough to interfere with relationships or work to be considered PTSD. The course of the illness varies. Some people recover within 6 months, while others have symptoms that last much longer. In some people, the condition becomes chronic.A doctor who has experience helping people with mental illnesses, such as a psychiatrist or psychologist, can diagnose PTSD.To be diagnosed with PTSD, an adult must have all of the following for at least 1 month:Re-experiencing symptoms may cause problems in a person’s everyday routine. The symptoms can start from the person’s own thoughts and feelings. Words, objects, or situations that are reminders of the event can also trigger re-experiencing symptoms.Things that remind a person of the traumatic event can trigger avoidance symptoms. These symptoms may cause a person to change his or her personal routine. For example, after a bad car accident, a person who usually drives may avoid driving or riding in a car.Arousal symptoms are usually constant, instead of being triggered by things that remind one of the traumatic events. These symptoms can make the person feel stressed and angry. They may make it hard to do daily tasks, such as sleeping, eating, or concentrating.Cognition and mood symptoms can begin or worsen after the traumatic event, but are not due to injury or substance use. These symptoms can make the person feel alienated or detached from friends or family members.It is natural to have some of these symptoms after a dangerous event. Sometimes people have very serious symptoms that go away after a few weeks. This is called acute stress disorder, or ASD. When the symptoms last more than a month, seriously affect one’s ability to function, and are not due to substance use, medical illness, or anything except the event itself, they might be PTSD. Some people with PTSD don’t show any symptoms for weeks or months. PTSD is often accompanied by depression, substance abuse, or one or more of the other anxiety disorders.Children and teens can have extreme reactions to trauma, but their symptoms may not be the same as adults. In very young children (less than 6 years of age), these symptoms can include:Older children and teens are more likely to show symptoms similar to those seen in adults. They may also develop disruptive, disrespectful, or destructive behaviors. Older children and teens may feel guilty for not preventing injury or deaths. They may also have thoughts of revenge. For additional information, visit the Learn More section below. The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) offers free print materials in English and Spanish. These can be read online, downloaded, or delivered to you in the mail.Anyone can develop PTSD at any age. This includes war veterans, children, and people who have been through a physical or sexual assault, abuse, accident, disaster, or many other serious events. According to the National Center for PTSD, about 7 or 8 out of every 100 people will experience PTSD at some point in their lives. Women are more likely to develop PTSD than men, and genes may make some people more likely to develop PTSD than others.Not everyone with PTSD has been through a dangerous event. Some people develop PTSD after a friend or family member experiences danger or harm. The sudden, unexpected death of a loved one can also lead to PTSD.It is important to remember that not everyone who lives through a dangerous event develops PTSD. In fact, most people will not develop the disorder.Many factors play a part in whether a person will develop PTSD. Some examples are listed below. Risk factors make a person more likely to develop PTSD. Other factors, called resilience factors, can help reduce the risk of the disorder.Some factors that increase risk for PTSD include:Some resilience factors that may reduce the risk of PTSD include:Researchers are studying the importance of these and other risk and resilience factors, including genetics and neurobiology. With more research, someday it may be possible to predict who is likely to develop PTSD and to prevent it.The main treatments for people with PTSD are medications, psychotherapy (“talk” therapy), or both. Everyone is different, and PTSD affects people differently so a treatment that works for one person may not work for another. It is important for anyone with PTSD to be treated by a mental health provider who is experienced with PTSD. Some people with PTSD need to try different treatments to find what works for their symptoms.If someone with PTSD is going through an ongoing trauma, such as being in an abusive relationship, both of the problems need to be addressed. Other ongoing problems can include panic disorder, depression, substance abuse, and feeling suicidal.The most studied medications for treating PTSD include antidepressants, which may help control PTSD symptoms such as sadness, worry, anger, and feeling numb inside. Antidepressants and other medications may be prescribed along with psychotherapy. Other medications may be helpful for specific PTSD symptoms. For example, although it is not currently FDA approved, research has shown that Prazosin may be helpful with sleep problems, particularly nightmares, commonly experienced by people with PTSD.Doctors and patients can work together to find the best medication or medication combination, as well as the right dose. Check the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website (http://www.fda.gov/) for the latest information on patient medication guides, warnings, or newly approved medications.Psychotherapy (sometimes called “talk therapy”) involves talking with a mental health professional to treat a mental illness. Psychotherapy can occur one-on-one or in a group. Talk therapy treatment for PTSD usually lasts 6 to 12 weeks, but it can last longer. Research shows that support from family and friends can be an important part of recovery.Many types of psychotherapy can help people with PTSD. Some types target the symptoms of PTSD directly. Other therapies focus on social, family, or job-related problems. The doctor or therapist may combine different therapies depending on each person’s needs.Effective psychotherapies tend to emphasize a few key components, including education about symptoms, teaching skills to help identify the triggers of symptoms, and skills to manage the symptoms. One helpful form of therapy is called cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT. CBT can include:There are other types of treatment that can help as well. People with PTSD should talk about all treatment options with a therapist. Treatment should equip individuals with the skills to manage their symptoms and help them participate in activities that they enjoyed before developing PTSD.How Talk Therapies Help People Overcome PTSD  Talk therapies teach people helpful ways to react to the frightening events that trigger their PTSD symptoms. Based on this general goal, different types of therapy may:It may be very hard to take that first step to help yourself. It is important to realize that although it may take some time, with treatment, you can get better. If you are unsure where to go for help, ask your family doctor. You can also check NIMH's Help for Mental Illnesses page or search online for “mental health providers,” “social services,” “hotlines,” or “physicians” for phone numbers and addresses. An emergency room doctor can also provide temporary help and can tell you where and how to get further help. To help yourself while in treatment:Caring for yourself and others is especially important when large numbers of people are exposed to traumatic events (such as natural disasters, accidents, and violent acts). For more information, see the Learn More section, below.In the last decade, progress in research on the mental and biological foundations of PTSD has lead scientists to focus on better understanding the underlying causes of why people experience a range of reactions to trauma.Clinical trials are research studies that look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and conditions, including PTSD. During clinical trials, treatments might be new drugs or new combinations of drugs, new surgical procedures or devices, or new ways to use existing treatments. The goal of clinical trials is to determine if a new test or treatment works and is safe. Although individual participants may benefit from being part of a clinical trial, participants should be aware that the primary purpose of a clinical trial is to gain new scientific knowledge so that others may be better helped in the future.Doctors at NIMH are dedicated to mental health research. The studies take place at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland and require regular visits. After the initial phone interview, you will come to an appointment at the clinic and meet with one of our clinicians. Find NIH-funded studies currently recruiting participants with PTSD by using ClinicalTrials.gov (search: PTSD).To search for a clinical trial near you, you can visit ClinicalTrials.gov. This is a searchable registry and results database of federally and privately supported clinical trials conducted in the United States and around the world. ClinicalTrials.gov gives you information about a trial's purpose, who may participate, locations, and phone numbers to call for more details. This information should be used in conjunction with advice from health professionals.You can download or order free copies of the following booklets and brochures in English or en Español:Last Revised: February 2016Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.MoreMore Publications About Post-Traumatic Stress DisorderThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuCall the toll-free National Suicide Prevention Lifeline (NSPL) at 1-800-273-TALK (8255), 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The service is available to everyone. The deaf and hard of hearing can contact the Lifeline via TTY at 1-800-799-4889. All calls are confidential. Contact social media outlets directly if you are concerned about a friend’s social media updates or dial 911 in an emergency.  Learn more on the NSPL’s website.Suicide is a major public health concern. Over 40,000 people die by suicide each year in the United States; it is the 10th leading cause of death overall. Suicide is complicated and tragic but it is often preventable. Knowing the warning signs for suicide and how to get help can help save lives.The behaviors listed below may be signs that someone is thinking about suicide.If these warning signs apply to you or someone you know, get help as soon as possible, particularly if the behavior is new or has increased recently. One resource is the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline, 1-800-273-TALK (8255). The Lifeline is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The deaf and hard of hearing can contact the Lifeline via TTY at 1-800-799-4889.Suicide does not discriminate. People of all genders, ages, and ethnicities can be at risk. Suicidal behavior is complex and there is no single cause. In fact, many different factors contribute to someone making a suicide attempt. But people most at risk tend to share certain characteristics. The main risk factors for suicide are:Many people have some of these risk factors but do not attempt suicide. It is important to note that suicide is not a normal response to stress. Suicidal thoughts or actions are a sign of extreme distress, not a harmless bid for attention, and should not be ignored.Often, family and friends are the first to recognize the warning signs of suicide and can be the first step toward helping an at-risk individual find treatment with someone who specializes in diagnosing and treating mental health conditions. See the resources on our “Find Help for Mental Illnesses” page if you're not sure where to start.Men are more likely to die by suicide than women, but women are more likely to attempt suicide. Men are more likely to use deadlier methods, such as firearms or suffocation. Women are more likely than men to attempt suicide by poisoning. The most recent figures released by the CDC show that the highest rate of suicide deaths among women is found between ages 45 and 64, while the highest rate for men occurs at ages 75+. Children and young adults also are at risk for suicide. Suicide is the second leading cause of death for young people ages 15 to 34.The CDC reports that among racial and ethnic groups, American Indians and Alaska Natives tend to have the highest rate of suicides, followed by non-Hispanic Whites. African Americans tend to have the lowest suicide rate, while Hispanics tend to have the second lowest rate.Research has shown that there are multiple risk factors for suicide and that these factors may vary with age, gender, physical and mental well-being, and with individual experiences. Treatments and therapies for people with suicidal thoughts or actions will vary as well. NIMH has focused research on strategies that have worked well for mental health conditions related to suicide such as depression and anxiety.Multiple types of psychosocial interventions have been found to be beneficial for individuals who have attempted suicide. These types of interventions may prevent someone from making another attempt. Psychotherapy, or "talk therapy," is one type of psychosocial intervention and can effectively reduce suicide risk.One type of psychotherapy is called cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). CBT can help people learn new ways of dealing with stressful experiences through training. CBT helps individuals recognize their own thought patterns and consider alternative actions when thoughts of suicide arise.Another type of psychotherapy, called dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), has been shown to reduce the rate of suicide among people with borderline personality disorder, a serious mental illness characterized by unstable moods, relationships, self-image, and behavior. A therapist trained in DBT helps a person recognize when his or her feelings or actions are disruptive or unhealthy, and teaches the skills needed to deal better with upsetting situations.NIMH’s Find Help for Mental Illnesses page can help you locate a mental health provider in your area.Some individuals at risk for suicide might benefit from medication. Doctors and patients can work together to find the best medication or medication combination, as well as the right dose.Clozapine, is an antipsychotic medication used primarily to treat individuals with schizophrenia. However, it is the only medication with a specific U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) indication for reducing the risk of recurrent suicidal behavior in patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder who are at risk for ongoing suicidal behavior.  Because many individuals at risk for suicide often have psychiatric and substance use problems, individuals might benefit from medication along with psychosocial intervention.If you are prescribed a medication, be sure you:Other medications have been used to treat suicidal thoughts and behaviors but more research is needed to show the benefit for these options. For basic information about these medications, you can visit the NIMH Mental Health Medications webpage. For the most up-to-date information on medications, side effects, and warnings, visit the FDA website.In order to know who is most at risk and to prevent suicide, scientists need to understand the role of long-term factors (such as childhood experiences) as well as more immediate factors like mental health and recent life events. Researchers also are looking at how genes can either increase risk or make someone more resilient to loss and hardships.Recent findings from NIMH funded research are listed in the Research and Statistics section below but NIMH also is funding a number of ongoing studies related to suicide.Last Revised: March 2017Unless otherwise specified, NIMH information and publications are in the public domain and available for use free of charge. Citation of the NIMH is appreciated. Please see our Citing NIMH Information and Publications page for more information.This fact sheet can help you, or a friend or family member, learn about the signs and symptoms, risk factors and warning signs, and ongoing research about suicide and suicide prevention.More Publications About Suicide PreventionMoreClinical Trials Studying Suicide PreventionThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.Anxiety is a normal reaction to stress. It helps one deal with a tense situation in the office, study harder for an exam, keep focused on an important speech. In general, it helps one cope. But when anxiety becomes an excessive, irrational dread of everyday situations, it has become a disabling disorder. Learn more about anxiety disorders.Join A StudyFor opportunities to participate in NIMH research on the NIH campus, visit the clinical research website. Travel and lodging assistance available.Featured studies include only those currently recruiting participants. Studies with the most recent start date appear first.The negative valence systems of acute threat (fear), potential threat (anxiety), and sustained threat are among the most clinically important research domain constructs. Psychiatric disorders characterized by pathological fear and anxiety are common, and often disabling. Despite their limitations, exposure therapies are among the most efficacious treatments for these disorders. Extinction learning is thought to be a core mechanism of therapeutic exposure. Extinction learning is mediated by a well-defined circuit encompassing the medial prefrontal cortex, amygdala, and hippocampus. This raises the exciting possibility that direct engagement of this circuitry might enhance the response to therapeutic exposure. tDCS is a neuromodulation technology that can augment synaptic plasticity, learning, and memory. The proposed studies will employ an experimental therapeutics framework to assay mechanisms of action behind therapeutic exposure and evaluate whether tDCS engages these mechanisms.This study will enroll 62 healthy volunteers to test whether tDCS applied to the mPFC can augment spontaneous mPFC activity (Aim 1), functional engagement of extinction circuitry during extinction learning and recall (Aim 2), and classically-conditioned extinction learning (Aim 3).The purpose of this pilot study is to provide preliminary findings testing the Supporting Our Valued Adolescents (SOVA) intervention, two social media sites (one for adolescents, one for parents) aiming to address negative health beliefs, knowledge about depression or anxiety, parent-adolescent communication, in a moderated online peer community, with the goal of increasing adolescent use of mental health services.Background:PANS is an illness that comes on suddenly in children. The full name is Pediatric Acute-Onset Neuropsychiatric Syndrome. It can cause sudden obsessive-compulsive behaviors. It can also cause children to suddenly restricte their food intake. Researchers want to learn more about children with PANS. They also want to learn more about the illness.Objective:To study some disorders of behavior and emotion that start in childhood.Eligibility:Children 3 14 years old who have had severe obsessive-compulsive symptoms or food restriction start quicklyDesign:Parents will answer questions. The topics include:Their child s medical historyTheir child s physical and mental healthTheir family history. The focus will be on neurodevelopmental and psychiatric conditions. A family tree will be drawn.Participants will have a physical exam.Participants may take tests on paper or computer. These will focus on thinking, memory, and behavior.Participants and parents will give a blood sample.Participants will have magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). A strong magnetic field and radio waves take pictures of the brain. Participants will lie on a table that slides in and out of a metal scanner.Participants may have photos or videos taken.Participants may have other tests. These may include heart tests, sleep tests, and lumbar puncture.Sponsoring Institute: National Institute of Mental HealthAnxiety disorders are one of the most common psychological disorders. Underlying anxiety is an increased attentional bias to threat, which has been identified as a causal contributor in the development of anxiety. Given this causal relationship, attention bias modification was introduced as a treatment option where anxiety is reduced by training individuals to direct their attention away from threat and thereby decreasing anxiety. Over a decade of research using this approach, called attention bias modification (ABM), suggests that overall the approach is effective in reducing anxiety. Although ABM appears to be a very promising treatment option for anxiety, there are several factors limiting the effectiveness of ABM. These include the recognition of individual-level needs and a known underlying mechanism of action by which ABM is effective. Neuroimaging evidence suggests that attentional bias to visual threat is associated with a network of brain regions including the amygdala, anterior cingulate cortex, and visual cortex. In human participants, experience-dependent neuroplasticity is visible in voxel-based morphometry based measures of gray matter volume following training. Recently, voxel-based morphometry measures of gray matter volume have been linked to dendritic spine density—a known cellular mechanism for learning-related neuroplasticity. Thus, voxel-based morphometry measures are ideally suited to measure learning-related neuroplasticity following attention bias modification. In this proposal participants' level of attentional bias, anxiety, and gray matter volume will be measured before and after completing six weeks of attention bias modification training (N = 50) or attention control training (N= 50). The proposal aims to (1) establish that pre-treatment bias predicts variability in gray matter volume in the extended amygdala and anterior cingulate cortex, (2) assess the extent to which reduced extended amygdala and anterior cingulate cortex gray matter volume following ABM underlies reductions in attentional bias and anxiety, and (3) Establish pre-treatment bias as a predictor of successful ABM as measured by reduced bias, reduced anxiety, and reduced gray matter volume in the extended amygdala and anterior cingulate cortex. Consistent with the objectives of the AREA grant and NIMH's focus on identifying and validating new targets for treatment development that underlie disease mechanisms, the current proposal plans to involve students at a rural primarily undergraduate university in a research project aimed at establishing neuroplasticity in the extended amygdala and anterior cingulate cortex as a target mechanism for ABM training outcome, which could be used to objectively track training-related outcomes in anxiety treatment.Background: Mental health problems cause a disproportionate burden of disability among children and youth compared to adults. Primary care plays an important role in efforts to prevent and intervene early in the course of child and adolescent mental health problems. While research with adults has shown the feasibility of integrating mental health care into primary care settings, there have been few studies among children and youth. Evidence remains lacking that integration is feasible in diverse settings, that it improves outcomes, and that methods can be developed to address the mixed symptoms of emerging child/youth problems and their overlap with developmental and parental disorders.Goals: The purpose of this project is to test the effectiveness of adding a child/youth mental health component into an existing collaborative care program for adult mental health problems. The work will refine a framework for efficient cultural adaption and tailoring of an existing child/youth primary care mental health intervention and then test whether the tailored intervention results in improved child and parent outcomes. The work will also provide evidence about the mechanisms by which those outcomes are achieved and what factors influence uptake of the child/youth component by general practitioners (GPs). These results should be generalizable to low and middle income countries and to underserved areas of the US where there are minimal child mental health resources and family physicians provide the bulk of medical care for children and youth.Methods: The planned work involves the adaptation/tailoring process followed by a trial with 45 GPs already engaged in collaborative care for adults; the trial will study adding collaborative care for children ages 5-15. GPs will be randomly assigned in groups to begin 6-month control periods involving child mental health screening and referral. They will then receive child/youth training and begin second 6-month periods of screening plus ongoing coaching and booster sessions and collaborative management. Primary outcomes will be measured by recruiting and following for 6 months two cohorts of children/youth and their parents (one control, one collaborative care). Data collected from GPs, parents, youth, and the collaborative care data system will allow measurement of key factors that determine the program's success in helping children and families.Background:Arginine vasopressin (AVP) is a hormone made in the body. It can make negative feelings stronger. The way AVP is regulated may be abnormal in people who have mood and anxiety disorders. SRX246 is a new drug that can block a receptor for AVP on brain cells. Researchers want to study how this drug affects the way people respond to threat and anxiety.Objectives:To see if the new drug SRX246 affects how people respond to the threat of an unpleasant shock.Eligibility:Healthy adults ages 21-50Design:Participants will be screened in another protocol.Participants will have 4 visits over 4 weeks.At visit 1, participants will have small electrodes taped to their arm to give shocks. Electrodes on the arm, chest, and face will measure sweat, heart rate, and blinking. Participants will hear loud noises and get test shocks for about 15 minutes.At the other 3 visits, participants will have some or all of these tests:- Blood and urine tests- Heart tests- Suicide screenAt each visit, participants will answer questions about their mood and anxiety. They will identify emotions in pictures. They will have shock testing for 40 minutes: they will hear loud sounds through headphones and get shocks.Participants will take the study pill 2 times a day for a week after visit 1 and a week after visit 3. One week it will be SRX246. The other week it will be a placebo.Participants may be contacted daily to remind them to take the medicine.Participants will have either a follow-up visit or follow-up phone call.Background:Researchers want to better understand brain processes related to fear and anxiety. They want to find out if transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), a type of brain stimulation, can reduce anxiety.Objective:To see how TMS affects fear and anxiety through memory and attention tasks.Eligibility:Healthy people ages 18-50 who are right-handedDesign:Participants will be screened through another protocol.Participants in the pilot study will have 1 visit. This includes:Urine testsQuestionnaires about mood and thinkingShock and startle workup: Electrodes are taped to the wrists or fingers. Participants will be shocked to find out what level of shock is uncomfortable but tolerable. They will hear loud, sudden noises through headphones.TMS: A coil is held on the scalp. A magnetic field stimulates the brain. Sometimes they might receive fake TMS. This feels the same as real TMS. They will perform simple tasks. Participants in the main study will have 2 visits within 2 weeks.The first visit includes:Urine testsQuestionnaires about mood and thinkingMRI: Participants lie on a table that slides into a scanner. They will be in the scanner about 1 hour. A computer screen in the scanner will tell them to perform simple tasks.The second visit includes:Shock and startle workupTMSAnxiety is among the most prevalent, costly and disabling illnesses and tends emerge early in childhood. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is the first-line treatment for early life anxiety, but as many as 40% of young patients who receive CBT fail to get better. The proposed study will examine brain changes marking positive response to CBT for anxiety and how these changes may differ in children compared adolescents. By helping us to understand how CBT works, this study will pave the way for new treatments to stop anxiety early.This study will examine longitudinal brain development in young adolescent girls with a history of Non-Suicidal Self-Injury (NSSI). Specifically, three constructs outlined by the the Research Domains Criteria (RDoC) will be examined through self-assessment, MRI, and a cognitive battery.This project aims to identify brain and behavioral characteristics of individuals experiencing symptoms of generalized anxiety disorder that will predict the effectiveness of Exposure-based therapy versus Behavioral Activation Therapy. Brain imaging aspects of the study will use functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electroencephalography (EEG). Behavioral assessments will include self-report questionnaires, computer-based and observational tasks, and interviews. Assessments will focus on how individuals process positive information (such as reward) and negative information (such as distressing images), as well as how people make decisions. These assessments will be conducted across 2-3 in-person sessions prior to beginning the treatment, and will be repeated across 2-3 in-person sessions after completing treatment. A blood draw will also be conducted pre- and post- treatment. Both the Exposure-based and Behavior Activation therapy will consist of 10, 90-minute weekly therapy sessions conducted in small groups.People facing serious health threats increasingly use Internet health support communities to obtain informational support, emotional support and other resources. This study introduces software algorithms similar to those used by social media sites to put people in touch with helpful information and social interactions. Participants from the American Cancer Society's Cancer Support Network will have access to this online support group using the default interface that orders content by broad content category and date or with a new interface that highlights communication content and people that match users' interests and needs.Unresolved psychological problems, such as anxiety, affect a significant number of our students and interfere with their ability to attend, actively participate, and prosper in school. This project will expand the capacity of selected mental health agencies to provide services in the participating schools through school therapeutic services (STS). The project will provide enhanced training in evidence-based behavioral health interventions to school-based mental health providers. The services will be implemented by STS Bachelor's or Master's level therapists supervised by their mental health agency supervisors (Internal Support), who are in turn supported by the research team (Train-the-Trainer) or external consultants (Train the Trainer+).Emotional disorders, including an array of anxiety and depressive syndromes, are the most common psychiatric disorders among adolescents, are highly comorbid, and severely impair the lives of youth and their families. Extant evidence-based therapies target only single disorders or symptom domains, are often not adopted by community mental health center (CMHC) clinicians, and have only modest effect sizes. To improve the clinical outcomes of these youth, the proposed study tests the effectiveness of two novel interventions (a transdiagnostic intervention, the Unified Protocol for the Treatment of Emotional Disorders in Adolescents, and a measurement and feedback system, the Youth Outcomes Questionnaires) relative to usual care in CMHCs.Social anxiety disorder is a highly prevalent condition that interferes with employment. Prior research indicates that social anxiety disorder interferes with work attainment. This project involves a two-site randomized trial of a community-based cognitive-behavioral intervention to reduce social anxiety and improve employment outcomes among unemployed persons with social anxiety disorder.A 16-week double blind, placebo-controlled investigation of escitalopram in adolescents with depression and/or anxiety with a family history of Bipolar Disorder. Subjects will be evaluated using semi-structured diagnostic interviews and symptom ratings, participate in a MRI scan and then randomized to treatment. Following randomization, high-risk youth will have visits every week for the first 4 weeks of treatment then biweekly up to 16 weeks during which time tolerability and ratings will be performed. MRI scan will be repeated at week 4.This study aims to identify the brain regions responsible for encoding cardiorespiratory 'interoceptive' sensations and determine whether they are dysfunctional in individuals affected by eating disorders, anxiety, depression, or brain injury. By evaluating the same interoceptive sensations across different human illnesses, the investigators hope to provide convergent evidence resulting in identification of core underlying neural processes, and to discern relative contributions in each condition.Neurofunctional Predictors of Escitalopram Treatment Response in Adolescents with Anxiety. To determine the effects of escitalopram on functional activation patterns during a Continuous Performance Task with Emotional and Neutral Distracters, the CPT-END. To examine baseline functional activity and functional connectivity profiles in the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex as markers of subsequent treatment response to escitalopram in adolescents with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). To use proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H MRS) to examine glutamatergic and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-related abnormalities in the anterior cingulate in adolescents with GAD as compared to healthy adolescents.The purpose of this study is to examine effectiveness and implementation for the Unified Protocol for the Transdiagnostic Treatment of Emotional Disorders in trauma exposed veterans.The purpose of this research is to learn more about how children with mental health problems, including bipolar disorder (BD), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), differ from children without these problems. The investigators want to understand how these 4 groups of children differ in brain activity, function, and structure.This study will examine how depression, anxiety, and migraine run in families. It will help in defining the risk factors for physical, mental, and health problems-as well as define ways that those problems may be prevented and treated.A broad range of ages among family members will be included to evaluate the patterns of how these disorders are expressed throughout people's lives. Children of all ages will be included, and those ages 8 to 17 will be interviewed directly.Assessments will be collected through criteria of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders IV as well as the spectrum, or range, of mood disorders and co-existing conditions. A member of the study team will visit the participants at home or will do an interview by telephone. Participation will take approximately 3 to 4 hours. Children will complete questionnaires given by the research team as well as questionnaires that they will do by themselves. The questions will pertain to the children's health, including physical and mental health and medical history, social relationships, problems, skills, and ways of dealing with important or stressful issues in their lives. These questionnaires will take up to 1 hour to complete.Health history gathered from adult participants will pertain to height, weight, exercise, and general function. Women will be asked about the use of oral contraceptives, estrogen, and progesterone. In addition, there will be questionnaires on personality and temperamental traits, that is, behavior and impulsiveness. Questions will also involve social intuition, family and other environmental factors, general functioning, and basic demographics such as ethnicity, race, socioeconomic status, marital status, education level, and employment history.Families enrolled in this phase of the research will be invited to participate in the next phase. There would be follow-up to evaluate the development of mood disorders, subtypes, and syndromes across the lifespan.The purpose of this study is to use brain imaging technology to examine brain changes that occur in children when they are exposed to various kinds of emotional tasks and to determine if these changes are related to the child's temperament.Studies suggest that the risk for developing mood and anxiety disorders in preschool children may be linked to differences in temperament. The relationship between temperament and risk or resilience may reflect the influences of brain activity on behavior at different stages of childhood development. Behavioral inhibition and mood or anxiety disorders have been linked to disturbances in the circuitry of several areas in the brain. However, the involvement of this circuitry in temperament remains unclear. This study will use functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine the function of different parts of the brain in children who have previously undergone temperament studies and have had their temperaments classified.Two sets of studies will be performed in the current protocol. A small set of pilot studies will be performed in infants, by staff at the University of Maryland. In terms of the studies among infants, these subjects will initially be contacted by staff at Maryland and then will be seen at the NIH for up to three visits lasting between 4- to 5- hours during the first year of life. These subjects also will undergo visits at the University of Maryland throughout the first year of life.This study will comprise up to four clinic visits. At Visit 1, children and their parents will meet with study staff individually and together for psychiatric interviews. Children will undergo a physical examination, medical history, a urine drug test, and practice in an fMRI simulator. Saliva samples will be collected from the children and tests will be given to assess stage of puberty, temperament, intelligence, feelings, experiences, and behavior. Other visits include fMRI scans of the brain and other tasks.Fear and anxiety are normal responses to a threat. However, anxiety is considered abnormal when the response to the threat is excessive or inappropriate. This study will examine changes in the body and brain that occur during unpleasant learning experiences in healthy volunteers with high, moderate, and low levels of anxiety.A high degree of generalized anxiety is a component of many anxiety disorders and is regarded as a marker of vulnerability for these disorders. People with anxiety disorders and individuals with high degrees of anxiety have inappropriate expectations of unpleasant events. This study will investigate the development of expecting unpleasant events in healthy volunteers with varying degrees of anxiety using aversive conditioning models. A later phase of the study will enroll participants with anxiety disorders and compare their responses to those of healthy volunteers.Patients who meet criteria for an anxiety disorder, and healthy volunteers who have no history of psychiatric or major medical illness will be enrolled in this study. Volunteers will come to the NIH Clinical Center three times for outpatient testing....The purpose of this study is to use brain imaging technology to investigate brain changes in people exposed to predictable versus unpredictable unpleasant stimuli. Unpleasant events that can be predicted evoke a response of fear, whereas unpredictable, unpleasant stimuli cause chronic anxiety not associated with a specific event. Information gained from this study may help in the development of more effective treatments for anxiety disorders.When confronted with fearful events, people eventually develop fear of specific cues that were associated with these events as well as to the environmental context in which the fearful event occurred. Evidence suggests that cued fear and contextual fear model different aspects of anxiety. However, studies that examine the way the brain affects expression of contextual fear have not been conducted. This study will use magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or Magneto-encephalography (MEG) to compare the brain activity underlying fear brought on by predictable and unpredictable aversive stimuli.The purpose of this protocol is to allow for the careful screening of patients and healthy volunteers for participation in research protocols in the Experimental Therapeutics and Pathophysiology Lab (ETPB) at the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) and for the collection of natural history data. In addition the protocol will allow clinicians to gain more experience in the use of a variety of polysomnographic and high-density EEG recordings. Subjects in this protocol will undergo an evaluation which may include: a psychiatric interview; a diagnostic interview; rating scales; a medical history; a physical exam; brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); electroencephalography (EEG); electrocardiography (EKG), magnetoencephalography (MEG); blood, saliva and urine laboratory evaluation; and a request for medical records. Subjects may also be asked to complete questionnaires about attitudes towards research and motivation for research participation. The data collected may also be linked with data from other mood and anxiety disorder protocols (e.g., brain imaging, DNA, psychophysiology tests, treatment studies, etc) for the purposes of better understanding the diagnosis, pathophysiology, and treatment response of patients with mood disorders. Parents of minors will be interviewed. Upon conclusion of the screening process, subjects will either be offered participation in a research protocol and will sign the appropriate informed consent, or will be considered not appropriate for participation in research and will be referred back into the community. The current protocol thus serves as an entry point for individuals with mood or anxiety disorders or healthy volunteers to enter NIMH IRB approved ETPB protocols....This study uses functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to learn how the brain functions in adolescents receiving fluoxetine (Prozac) cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) or interpersonal therapy (IPT) for anxiety or depression in children/adolescents.All participants will receive interviews to assess how they are doing in general, including general mood, degree of nervousness and behavior. Each participant and one of his or her parents will be interviewed separately and together. Those electing the medication study will also receive a physical examination. Participants are asked to complete tasks involving problem-solving and memory that involve looking at pictures, remembering things, testing reaction times, and making simple choices.Participants with anxiety or depression will first meet with a psychiatrist or psychologist for two weekly sessions of talk therapy.Those who remain anxious or depressed after these 2 weeks will have the 3 options based on their choice: 1) treatment with fluoxetine daily for 8 weeks 2) cognitive-behavioral therapy or interpersonal therapy (two kinds of talk therapy) once a week for 8 weeks 3) a random assignment (50% chance) to either placebo or fluoxetine for 8 weeks. In addition, subjects also will be randomly and blindly assigned to receive either an active computer-based training task or an inactive computer-based training task, administered as part of the other,along with their medication or talk -therapy treatment. The active training is thought to help anxiety whereas the inactive training is thought to have no effect. The purpose of this part of the study is to understand the best way to help children and adolescents who are having problems with anxiety. However, more research is needed to find the best way to help such children and adolescents. During and after the 8 weeks of treatment, each participant will complete verbal and written symptom ratings. Blood samples will be drawn for laboratory tests before drug treatment and after it ends.Those who have not improved by the end of the study will be offered other treatment for 1 to 3 months, and the clinicians will help with finding subsequent aftercare. Those who improve with treatment will continue therapy at NIH until an outside physician is able to assume responsibility for monitoring medication.This study has several parts. One part will examine the influence of factors such as personality and past experience on reactions to unpleasant stimuli. Others will examine the effect of personality and emotional and attentional states on learning and memory.When confronted with fearful or unpleasant events, people can develop fear of specific cues that were associated with these events as well as to the environmental context in which the events occurred via a process called classical conditioning. Classical conditioning has been used to model anxiety disorders, but the relationship between stress and anxiety and conditioned responses remains unclear. This study will examine the relationship between cued conditioning and context conditioning . This study will also explore the acquisition and retention of different types of motor, emotional, and cognitive associative processes during various tasks that range from mildly arousing to stressful.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, ADHD, is one of the most common mental disorders that develop in children. Children with ADHD have impaired functioning in multiple settings, including home, school, and in relationships with peers. If untreated, the disorder can have long-term adverse effects into adolescence and adulthood. Learn more about Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD, ADD).Join A StudyFor opportunities to participate in NIMH research on the NIH campus, visit the clinical research website. Travel and lodging assistance available.Featured studies include only those currently recruiting participants. Studies with the most recent start date appear first.This study aims to better understand how to best help parents of young children with problem behavior. Problem behaviors vary between and within children, but can include inattention/hyperactivity, tantrums, and/or noncompliance.Background: Mental health problems cause a disproportionate burden of disability among children and youth compared to adults. Primary care plays an important role in efforts to prevent and intervene early in the course of child and adolescent mental health problems. While research with adults has shown the feasibility of integrating mental health care into primary care settings, there have been few studies among children and youth. Evidence remains lacking that integration is feasible in diverse settings, that it improves outcomes, and that methods can be developed to address the mixed symptoms of emerging child/youth problems and their overlap with developmental and parental disorders.Goals: The purpose of this project is to test the effectiveness of adding a child/youth mental health component into an existing collaborative care program for adult mental health problems. The work will refine a framework for efficient cultural adaption and tailoring of an existing child/youth primary care mental health intervention and then test whether the tailored intervention results in improved child and parent outcomes. The work will also provide evidence about the mechanisms by which those outcomes are achieved and what factors influence uptake of the child/youth component by general practitioners (GPs). These results should be generalizable to low and middle income countries and to underserved areas of the US where there are minimal child mental health resources and family physicians provide the bulk of medical care for children and youth.Methods: The planned work involves the adaptation/tailoring process followed by a trial with 45 GPs already engaged in collaborative care for adults; the trial will study adding collaborative care for children ages 5-15. GPs will be randomly assigned in groups to begin 6-month control periods involving child mental health screening and referral. They will then receive child/youth training and begin second 6-month periods of screening plus ongoing coaching and booster sessions and collaborative management. Primary outcomes will be measured by recruiting and following for 6 months two cohorts of children/youth and their parents (one control, one collaborative care). Data collected from GPs, parents, youth, and the collaborative care data system will allow measurement of key factors that determine the program's success in helping children and families.This study seeks to characterize sleep physiology in adolescents with and without Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and its relationship to differential neurocognitive and clinical outcomes within these groups.The purpose of this study is to see if a non-medication intervention can increase motivation in individuals with ADHD by observing brain activity using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).Problems with distraction are widespread in the 21st century, but for people with developmental delays or behavioral challenges they can have more damaging effects. For example, susceptibility to distraction is associated with worse school and social performance, lower high school graduation rates, and increased incidence of serious accidents. The investigators' goal is to improve understanding of distractibility and develop a targeted treatment. The proposed intervention is based on models of habituation, which is a term that means reduced physiological and emotional response to a stimulus (e.g. moving object, or loud noise, etc.) as it is seen repeatedly. The investigators use virtual reality technology to show study participants distracting stimuli repeatedly in a virtual classroom setting, and their hypothesis states that participants will improve attention in the face of distraction by training with this technology intervention. The virtual classroom setting is especially relevant for children who have significant challenges with distractibility, such as children with ADHD. This intervention will likely be effective in helping individuals with other clinical disorders and perhaps the general population as well.The main purpose of this study is to see the affects of the study medication called mixed amphetamine salts-extended release (MAS-XR) on brain function by taking brain pictures. The researchers also want to see if MAS-XR makes your child more or less likely to develop problems like acting out (i.e. periods of irritability, agitation, aggression).MAS-XR is approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in adults, children and adolescents.Background:When children have severe irritability and temper outbursts, they can be so cranky or angry that it leads to problems at home, in school, and with friends. This is called Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder (DMDD) and there have been no psychological treatments developed specifically for children with this problem. Researchers think two forms of therapy, Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) and Interpretation Bias Training (IBT), might help children with DMDD.Objective:To test two whether IBT and CBT can decrease severe irritability in children and youth.Eligibility:Children 8-17 years old with DMDD. Their symptoms must have started before age 10.Design:Participants will be screened with a review of their symptoms. Parents and participants will answer questions.Participants can do only one or both of these treatments if they wish. Those who wish to do both will start with IBT.Participants who do CBT will have 12-16 weekly meetings of research talk therapy. A parent will participate in part of the sessions.Participants will talk about what makes them irritable and how it affects them. They may be put in situations that might make them annoyed or irritable.Participants will rate how intense their irritability is. Parents and participants will complete rating scales, questionnaires, and interviews.Participants will do practice activities at home.Participants doing IBT will have up to 14 sessions over 10 weeks.Participants will view 15 faces, one at a time, on a computer. They will choose if the face looks happy or angry on a computer. Sometimes the computer gives feedback. Participants will complete some sessions at the NIH and some at home.Participants and parents answer questions about their progress.The purpose of this research is to study why most children who have tics never develop Tourette syndrome but some do. In other words, we aim to find features that may predict whose tics will go away and whose tics will continue or worsen, in children ages 5 through 10 years whose first tic occurred within the past 6 months.The purpose of this research is to learn more about how children with mental health problems, including bipolar disorder (BD), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), differ from children without these problems. The investigators want to understand how these 4 groups of children differ in brain activity, function, and structure.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD is an anxiety disorder that can develop after exposure to a terrifying event or ordeal in which grave physical harm occurred or was threatened. Traumatic events that may trigger PTSD include violent personal assaults, natural or human-caused disasters, accidents, or military combat. Learn more about Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD).Join A StudyFor opportunities to participate in NIMH research on the NIH campus, visit the clinical research website. Travel and lodging assistance available.Featured studies include only those currently recruiting participants. Studies with the most recent start date appear first.Background:The Human Brain Collection Core (HBCC) collects brain and other tissues. They get these from deceased people who may or may not have had psychiatric disorders. The next of kin gives permission for researchers to get the tissues. Researchers want to collect medical details of people whose brains are donated. They also want to use the donated tissue to study brain chemistry and structure. This could lead to better treatments for mental illness.Objective:To create a collection of human brain tissue to learn about the causes and mechanisms of mental disorders.Eligibility:People willing to donate their deceased relative s brain tissue. The deceased person could not have had any of the following:Severe mental retardationLong-lasting seizure disorderInfections that affect the brainDecompositionBrain damageBeing on a respirator for more than 12 hoursMajor sepsisSerious renal or hepatic diseaseCertain dementias and degenerative diseasesDesign:Medical Examiner s Offices will screen donors who have recently died. Some others will be screened by hospitals or funeral homes.Participants will be the next of kin. They will give consent for HBCC to obtain brain tissue from the deceased person. The tissue will be frozen for future research.Participants will have a 30-minute phone call. They will answer questions about the deceased person s medical and psychiatric conditions. They will answer questions about the person s use of medicines and drugs.Participants will be contacted by a social worker. They will be asked for permission to access the deceased person s medical records.This Phase 1b study examines the safety and efficacy of parenterally-administered lanicemine in a parallel-arm, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in adult patients (N=24) with significant PTSD symptoms and elevated anxiety potentiated startle (APS). Investigator hypothesize that lanicemine (100 mg) displays a normalization of APS following three infusions over 5 non-consecutive days. If target engagement is demonstrated and the drug is safe and tolerable in this patient population, investigator will proceed to a larger POC study.This study aims to first identify the optimal estradiol (E2) dose that best engages the fear extinction network among healthy women using oral contraceptives. The second objective is to then evaluate the impact of this optimal E2 dose, when administered in conjunction with 5 sessions of Prolonged Exposure therapy, on the functional activity of the fear extinction network of women with clinically significant posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms. This approach will elucidate the neural mechanisms underlying effective exposure treatment for these symptoms, and will document how estradiol could be used as adjunct to enhance the outcome of extinction-based therapies.This study will use a neuroeconomic paradigm with state-of-the-art imaging protocols to probe abnormal social reward processing underlying social withdrawal in symptomatic trauma-exposed women. By also gathering self-report measures of social anhedonia, performance on non-social and social reward valuation tasks, and measures of real-world social functioning including social network size, we aim to specify how alterations in social reward processing result in social withdrawal and functional impairment.The purpose of this study is to examine effects of blocking the orexin system with suvorexant after exposure-based intervention for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) on sleep, PTSD symptoms, and intersession habituation.The purpose of this study is to examine effectiveness and implementation for the Unified Protocol for the Transdiagnostic Treatment of Emotional Disorders in trauma exposed veterans.This study is intended to help develop new MRI imaging techniques for studying mood and anxiety disorders. Researchers believe that depression and anxiety disorders may cause structural and functional changes in the brain. This study will optimize the way MRI scans are collected to look at brain structure and examine how the brain behaves while subjects perform particular tasks.Healthy normal subjects between 18 and 50 years of age who have never had a major psychiatric disorder and who have no first-degree relatives with mood disorders may be eligible for this study. Candidates are screened by phone with questions about their psychiatric and medical history, current emotional state and sleep pattern, and family history of psychiatric disorders. Candidates who pass the preliminary screening then undergo additional screening interviews and laboratory tests.Participants undergo magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and neuropsychological testing, as follows:" 
             
               MRI scans: Subjects are asked to participate in an MRI study on one of several scanners to measure blood flow in the brain, concentrations of certain chemicals in the brain, or magnetic properties of the brain. MRI uses a strong magnet and radio waves to obtain pictures of the brain. The subject lies still on a narrow bed with a metal coil close to the head. For this study, subjects may be asked to wear a special coil on the neck to help measure blood flow. They may be asked to watch a screen presenting images or to do a task in which they respond to pictures or sounds and may be asked to return for additional scans." 
             
               Neuropsychological testing: Subjects may undergo tests of cognitive performance. Often, people with mood disorders have subtle changes in performance on these tests that allow researchers to pinpoint where brain abnormalities occur. Before the tests can be used in patients, they must be validated by using healthy subjects. These tests are presented either orally, in written form, or on a computer.The purpose of this protocol is to allow for the careful screening of patients and healthy volunteers for participation in research protocols in the Experimental Therapeutics and Pathophysiology Lab (ETPB) at the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) and for the collection of natural history data. In addition the protocol will allow clinicians to gain more experience in the use of a variety of polysomnographic and high-density EEG recordings. Subjects in this protocol will undergo an evaluation which may include: a psychiatric interview; a diagnostic interview; rating scales; a medical history; a physical exam; brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); electroencephalography (EEG); electrocardiography (EKG), magnetoencephalography (MEG); blood, saliva and urine laboratory evaluation; and a request for medical records. Subjects may also be asked to complete questionnaires about attitudes towards research and motivation for research participation. The data collected may also be linked with data from other mood and anxiety disorder protocols (e.g., brain imaging, DNA, psychophysiology tests, treatment studies, etc) for the purposes of better understanding the diagnosis, pathophysiology, and treatment response of patients with mood disorders. Parents of minors will be interviewed. Upon conclusion of the screening process, subjects will either be offered participation in a research protocol and will sign the appropriate informed consent, or will be considered not appropriate for participation in research and will be referred back into the community. The current protocol thus serves as an entry point for individuals with mood or anxiety disorders or healthy volunteers to enter NIMH IRB approved ETPB protocols....The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling nationally from around the countryThe purpose of this study is to evaluate the rapid and sustained antidepressant effects of repeat doses of ketamine in the brain. We want to learn how ketamine affects areas of the brain important in regulating mood and if there are unique signatures that could help predict who may respond to the drug. Also, we want to see if repeated doses of ketamine are safe and effective in treating the symptoms of depression.We are enrolling eligible adults, ages 18 to 65 with major depressive disorder. This inpatient study lasts 14-20 weeks and procedures include a medication taper and drug-free period, taking repeated doses of the research drug, taking placebo, multiple brain imaging scans, transcranial magnetic stimulation, and psychological testing. After completing the study, participants can receive short-term care at the NIH while transitioning back to a provider.The study is conducted at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, MD. There is no cost to participate and compensation is provided. This study enrolls eligible participants from across the USA. Travel arrangements are provided and costs are covered by NIMH (arrangements vary by distance). After completing the study, participants receive short-term follow-up care at the NIH while transitioning back to a provider.First steps to participate include, calling NIMH, learning study details, asking about your eligibility, and consenting to participate.To find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-877-646-3644 (1-877-MIND-NIH) [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].Join a Research Study: Enrolling nationally from around the countryThis research study seeks depressed participants to test the effects of the combination of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and psychotherapy on brain function.This study is enrolling eligible adults ages 18-65 with major depressive disorder, who are free of other serious medical conditions. If you are currently taking anti-depressants, you may still be eligible.This inpatient and/or outpatient study involves daily visits for 8 weeks followed by once-monthly visits for 3 months.  Participation includes research evaluations, brain scans, and active TMS and psychotherapy, or inactive TMS and psychotherapy. Those who received inactive TMS may receive active TMS after the experimental phase is completed. After completing the study, participants receive short-term care at the NIH while transitioning back to a provider. The 3 monthly follow up visits can be conducted via telephone.All clinical evaluations, research tasks and visits are free of cost. Participants are compensated for research procedures. The study is conducted at the NIH in Bethesda, Maryland, and is enrolling participants nationwide, from across the United States. Travel arrangements are provided and costs are covered by NIMH (arrangements vary by distance).To find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-877-646-3644 (1-877-MIND-NIH) [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].Join a Research Study: Enrolling locally from the Washington, D.C. metro regionThe purpose of this research study is to better understand how the brain and body work when a person with depression feels anxious.Research Participation Includes: 1-3 outpatient visits, computer tasks, and exposure to unpleasant stimuli and a brain scan (functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI).Who Can Participate: Depressed adults between the ages of 18-50, who are free of psychiatric medications and certain medical conditions.You may not be eligible is you are pregnant, have a pacemaker, current alcohol or substance abuse problems, heart disease, neurological disease, or any health problems that would interfere with the study or make it unsafe for you.The study is conducted at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland. The testing sessions will take up to 2.5 hours. There is no cost to participate and compensation is provided. This study does not include treatment.First Steps to Participate in Research: Learn study details, ask about your eligibility, and consent to participate.To find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-301-451-5087 [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].Join a Research Study: Enrolling nationally from around the countryThis study screens for various inpatient and outpatient studies that investigate the brain and experimental medications (such as ketamine and AV101) to quickly lift severe and hard-to-treat depressive symptoms.Participation may include outpatient visits or inpatient stays lasting 4 to 12 weeks at the NIH Clinical Center, Bethesda, MD. Procedures may include: tapering off current psychiatric medications, a medication-free period, oral or intravenous medication versus placebo, and brain scans. You may also qualify for other studies that have different requirements and lengths of stay.Participants must be ages 18-70 and free of serious medical conditions. These studies may enroll eligible participants from across the USA. Travel arrangements and compensation are provided. There is no cost to participate.First steps to participate include, calling NIMH, learning study details, asking about your eligibility, and consenting to participate.To find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-877-646-3644 (1-877-MIND-NIH) [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].Join a Research Study: Enrolling locally from the Washington, D.C. metro regionThe major goal of this study is to examine how mood disorders, anxiety disorders and migraine run in families. We study both genetic and environmental factors that may contribute to these conditions.We recruit people ages 21 and over with depression, manic-depression, social phobia, panic, generalized anxiety, migraine and people without any of these problems. Participants are interviewed about medical and mental symptoms and problems, their health behavior, social factors and a variety of other measures related to their health and behavior. Family members ages 8 and over will also be asked to participate. Some families will be invited to participate in further studies of biological and genetic factors.To find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-877-250-1560 [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].Join a Research Study: Enrolling nationally from around the countryNational Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) researchers seek adults 18 to 70, who have a history of attempted suicide but are not currently suicidal, for a study of suicide and brain function. Participation includes up to seven days as an inpatient at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland. Procedures include blood tests, medical evaluations, brain imaging, sleep studies and psychiatric interviews. Participants do not need to stop their current medications. Compensation and transportation are provided. Pregnant women and individuals with serious medical conditions are not eligible.There is no cost to participate. We enroll eligible participants locally and from around the country. Travel arrangements are provided and costs are covered by NIMH (arrangements vary by distance). After completing the study, participants receive short-term follow-up care at the NIH while transitioning back to a provider.If you are in a crisis situation, contact your doctor's office, go to the nearest emergency room, or call 911 for emergency services. You can also call the toll-free, 24-hour hotline of the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline, 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255).  Your call will be connected to the crisis center nearest you. Trained staff can help talk you through your crisis.To find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-877-646-3644 (1-877-MIND-NIH) [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling locally from the Washington, D.C. metro regionThis pediatric research study seeks to learn how the brain functions in children and adolescents with anxiety and/or depression. These studies seek boys and girls ages 8-17 to participate in research at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland. Research participation includes brain imaging and computer-based problem solving and memory tasks. Treatment is available over 8 weeks of outpatient visits.All participants will receive interviews to assess how they are doing in general, including his or her general mood, degree of nervousness and behavior. Each participant and one of his or her parents will be interviewed separately and together. All those enrolled in the study will have a physical examination. They will undergo tests involving problem-solving and memory and perform tasks that involve looking at pictures, remembering things, testing reaction times, and making simple choices.Participants with anxiety or depression will first meet with a psychiatrist or psychologist for two weekly sessions of talk therapy. Those who remain anxious or depressed after these 2 weeks will have the 3 options based on their choice: 1) treatment with fluoxetine daily for 8 weeks 2) cognitive-behavioral therapy (a talk therapy) once a week for 8 weeks 3) a random assignment (50% chance) to either placebo or fluoxetine for 8 weeks. All participants will be seen approximately weekly for 8 weeks by a doctor to talk and complete verbal and written exercises. Blood samples will be drawn for laboratory tests before drug treatment and after it ends.Those who have not improved by the end of the study will be offered other treatment for 1 to 3 months, and the clinicians will help with finding subsequent aftercare. Those who improve with treatment will continue therapy at NIH until an outside physician is able to assume responsibility for monitoring medication.To find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-301-402-8225 [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling locally from the Washington, D.C. metro regionThis pediatric research study seeks to learn how the brain functions in children and adolescents with anxiety and/or depression. These studies seek boys and girls ages 8-17 to participate in research at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland. Research participation includes brain imaging and computer-based problem solving and memory tasks. Treatment is available over 8 weeks of outpatient visits.All participants will receive interviews to assess how they are doing in general, including his or her general mood, degree of nervousness and behavior. Each participant and one of his or her parents will be interviewed separately and together. All those enrolled in the study will have a physical examination. They will undergo tests involving problem-solving and memory and perform tasks that involve looking at pictures, remembering things, testing reaction times, and making simple choices.Participants with anxiety or depression will first meet with a psychiatrist or psychologist for two weekly sessions of talk therapy. Those who remain anxious or depressed after these 2 weeks will have the 3 options based on their choice: 1) treatment with fluoxetine daily for 8 weeks 2) cognitive-behavioral therapy (a talk therapy) once a week for 8 weeks 3) a random assignment (50% chance) to either placebo or fluoxetine for 8 weeks. All participants will be seen approximately weekly for 8 weeks by a doctor to talk and complete verbal and written exercises. Blood samples will be drawn for laboratory tests before drug treatment and after it ends.Those who have not improved by the end of the study will be offered other treatment for 1 to 3 months, and the clinicians will help with finding subsequent aftercare. Those who improve with treatment will continue therapy at NIH until an outside physician is able to assume responsibility for monitoring medication.To find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-301-402-8225 [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling locally from the Washington, D.C. metro regionTo find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-301-402-4961 [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].The purpose of this research study is to better understand how the brain and body work when healthy volunteers feel anxious.Research Participation Includes: 1-4 outpatient visits, computer tasks, and exposure to unpleasant stimuli. Researchers will assess changes in heart rate, muscle activity, sweat responses, and respiration.Who Can Participate: Healthy volunteers between the ages of 18-50, who have no current psychiatric disorder and are free of certain medical conditions.You may not be eligible if you are pregnant, have current drug or alcohol abuse, heart disease, neurological disease, or any health problems that would interfere with the study or make it unsafe for you.The study is conducted at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland. The testing sessions may take up to 3 hours. There is no cost to participate and compensation is provided.First Steps to Participate in Research: Learn study details, ask about your eligibility, and consent to participate.Information Regarding Study And SurveyThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling locally from the Washington, D.C. metro regionTo find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-888-644-2694 (1-888-NIH-ANXI) [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].The purpose of these research studies is to better understand how the brain and body work in individuals with anxiety disorders.Research Participation Includes: One outpatient testing session performing computer tasks during a brain scan (functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI). During the session, you will be exposed to unpleasant stimuli.  Researchers will assess brain and body responses to task performance reviewing brain imaging (fMRI) and physiological changes (e.g. heart rate) that occur when participants feel anxious.Who Can Participate: Adults between the ages of 18-50 with generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder or a panic disorder. Eligible participants must be in good physical health, not currently on any psychotropic medications or other medications that may interfere with the study, and be free of a history of any additional psychiatric disorders.This study is conducted at the Eligible NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland . The one testing session lasts up to 2.5 hours. There is no cost to participate and compensation is provided.First Steps to Join a Study: Learn study details, be pre-screened for eligibility, and consent to participate.  Refer to study 02-M-0321.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling locally from the Washington, D.C. metro regionTo find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-301-402-4961 [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].The purpose of this research study is to see how brain stimulation, transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), affects fear and anxiety.Research participation includes 2 outpatient study visits, 1 to 2 weeks apart, lasting up to 3 hours each. During one study visit a memory task is performed during one of several brain scans [functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI)]. In the second study visit, participants receive transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and complete a computer task while exposed to unpleasant stimuli. Researchers will assess brain images, changes in heart rate, muscle activity, sweat responses, and respiration.This study is enrolling healthy adults between the ages of 18-50 who have no current psychiatric disorders.These outpatient visits are conducted at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland. There is no cost to participate and compensation is provided. First steps to participate include calling NIMH, learning study details, asking about your eligibility, and consenting to participate.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling nationally from around the countryTo find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-877-646-3644 (1-877-MIND-NIH) [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].This study screens for various inpatient and outpatient studies that investigate the brain and experimental medications (such as ketamine and AV101) to quickly lift severe and hard-to-treat depressive symptoms.Participation may include outpatient visits or inpatient stays lasting 4 to 12 weeks at the NIH Clinical Center, Bethesda, MD. Procedures may include: tapering off current psychiatric medications, a medication-free period, oral or intravenous medication versus placebo, and brain scans. You may also qualify for other studies that have different requirements and lengths of stay.Participants must be ages 18-70 and free of serious medical conditions. These studies may enroll eligible participants from across the USA. Travel arrangements and compensation are provided. There is no cost to participate.First steps to participate include, calling NIMH, learning study details, asking about your eligibility, and consenting to participate.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling nationally from around the countryTo find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-877-646-3644 (1-877-MIND-NIH) [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].This study screens for various inpatient and outpatient studies that investigate the brain and experimental medications (such as ketamine and AV101) to quickly lift severe and hard-to-treat depressive symptoms.Participation may include outpatient visits or inpatient stays lasting 4 to 12 weeks at the NIH Clinical Center, Bethesda, MD. Procedures may include: tapering off current psychiatric medications, a medication-free period, oral or intravenous medication versus placebo, and brain scans. You may also qualify for other studies that have different requirements and lengths of stay.Participants must be ages 18-70 and free of serious medical conditions. These studies may enroll eligible participants from across the USA. Travel arrangements and compensation are provided. There is no cost to participate.First steps to participate include, calling NIMH, learning study details, asking about your eligibility, and consenting to participate.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling nationally from around the countryTo find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-877-646-3644 (1-877-MIND-NIH) [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].This study screens for various inpatient and outpatient studies that investigate the brain and experimental medications (such as ketamine and AV101) to quickly lift severe and hard-to-treat depressive symptoms.Participation may include outpatient visits or inpatient stays lasting 4 to 12 weeks at the NIH Clinical Center, Bethesda, MD. Procedures may include: tapering off current psychiatric medications, a medication-free period, oral or intravenous medication versus placebo, and brain scans. You may also qualify for other studies that have different requirements and lengths of stay.Participants must be ages 18-70 and free of serious medical conditions. These studies may enroll eligible participants from across the USA. Travel arrangements and compensation are provided. There is no cost to participate.First steps to participate include, calling NIMH, learning study details, asking about your eligibility, and consenting to participate.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling nationally from around the countryTo find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-877-646-3644 (1-877-MIND-NIH) [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].This research study seeks depressed participants to test the effects of the combination of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and psychotherapy on brain function.This study is enrolling eligible adults ages 18-65 with major depressive disorder, who are free of other serious medical conditions. If you are currently taking anti-depressants, you may still be eligible.This inpatient and/or outpatient study involves daily visits for 8 weeks followed by once-monthly visits for 3 months.  Participation includes research evaluations, brain scans, and active TMS and psychotherapy, or inactive TMS and psychotherapy. Those who received inactive TMS may receive active TMS after the experimental phase is completed. After completing the study, participants receive short-term care at the NIH while transitioning back to a provider. The 3 monthly follow up visits can be conducted via telephone.All clinical evaluations, research tasks and visits are free of cost. Participants are compensated for research procedures. The study is conducted at the NIH in Bethesda, Maryland, and is enrolling participants nationwide, from across the United States. Travel arrangements are provided and costs are covered by NIMH (arrangements vary by distance).The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling nationally from around the countryTo find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-877-646-3644 (1-877-MIND-NIH) [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].This research study seeks depressed participants to test the effects of the combination of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) and psychotherapy on brain function.This study is enrolling eligible adults ages 18-65 with major depressive disorder, who are free of other serious medical conditions. If you are currently taking anti-depressants, you may still be eligible.This inpatient and/or outpatient study involves daily visits for 8 weeks followed by once-monthly visits for 3 months.  Participation includes research evaluations, brain scans, and active TMS and psychotherapy, or inactive TMS and psychotherapy. Those who received inactive TMS may receive active TMS after the experimental phase is completed. After completing the study, participants receive short-term care at the NIH while transitioning back to a provider. The 3 monthly follow up visits can be conducted via telephone.All clinical evaluations, research tasks and visits are free of cost. Participants are compensated for research procedures. The study is conducted at the NIH in Bethesda, Maryland, and is enrolling participants nationwide, from across the United States. Travel arrangements are provided and costs are covered by NIMH (arrangements vary by distance).The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling locally from the Washington, D.C. metro regionTo find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-888-644-2694 (1-888-NIH-ANXI) [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].This study seeks to understand how people who struggle with anxiety respond to different stressful situations, and how Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) may change these responses.Research Participation Includes: Physical and neurological exams, EKG, blood and urine tests and stress-inducing tasks. Optional Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) is conducted over 8 outpatient group visits of 1.5 hours each.Who Can Participate: The study is enrolling adults, aged 18-50, with generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder or a panic disorder.  Eligibility includes fluency in English, in good health, free of certain medications and without recent drug or alcohol abuse (6 months).Enrollees will participate in 2-4 outpatient procedural visits of 1.5 hours each and 8 CBT sessions. There is no cost to participate and compensation is provided. Research is conducted at the NIH Clinical Center, Bethesda, MD.First Steps to Join a Study: Call or email us at 1-888-644-2694 (1-888-NIH-ANXI), TTY: 1-866-411-1010, or anxiety@mail.nih.gov. Learn study details, be pre-screened for eligibility, and consent to participate. Refer to study 03-M-0093.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling nationally from around the countryTo find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-866-644-4363 [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].Researchers are looking for genes that may affect a person's chances of developing bipolar disorder. You can participate in this research study if you are over 18, have a bipolar diagnosis, or have a family member with bipolar disorder.This study includes a telephone interview (2-4 hours) and a blood sample (blood work from your physician.) The purpose of this study is to identify genes that may contribute to the development of bipolar disorder (manic depression), and related conditions. Bipolar disorder is a common and potentially life-threatening mood disorder. The tendency to develop bipolar disorder can be inherited, but this is poorly understood and probably involves multiple genes.This study will use genetic markers to map and identify genes that contribute to bipolar disorder. Families and individuals who have the disorder are asked to contribute personal information and a blood sample to an anonymous national database. This information will aid scientists around the world who are working together to develop better treatments for this serious mood disorder.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling locally from the Washington, D.C. metro regionTo find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-888-644-2694 (1-888-NIH-ANXI) [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].This study seeks to understand how people who struggle with anxiety respond to different stressful situations. Basic research has identified biological processes that play a key role in fear and anxiety. The present study examines such processes across people with varying levels of anxietyResearch Participation Includes: Exposure to mildly unpleasant events while you complete a computer task. Researchers will assess changes in heart rate, muscle activity, sweat responses and respiration. Participation may also include assessments of your memory and attention span.Who Can Participate in this Study: This study is enrolling adults, aged 18-50, with generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder or a panic disorder. Eligible participants must be in good physical health, may not be currently on any psychotropic medications or other medications that may interfere with the study, and free of a history of any additional psychiatric disorders.This study is conducted at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland. There are several outpatient study visits up to four hours each.First Steps to Join a Study: Learn study details, be pre-screened for eligibility, and consent to participate. Refer to study 03-M-0093.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling locally from the Washington, D.C. metro regionTo find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-888-644-2694 (1-888-NIH-ANXI) [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].This study seeks to understand how people who struggle with anxiety respond to different stressful situations. Basic research has identified biological processes that play a key role in fear and anxiety. The present study examines such processes across people with varying levels of anxietyResearch Participation Includes: Exposure to mildly unpleasant events while you complete a computer task. Researchers will assess changes in heart rate, muscle activity, sweat responses and respiration. Participation may also include assessments of your memory and attention span.Who Can Participate in this Study: This study is enrolling adults, aged 18-50, with generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder or a panic disorder. Eligible participants must be in good physical health, may not be currently on any psychotropic medications or other medications that may interfere with the study, and free of a history of any additional psychiatric disorders.This study is conducted at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland. There are several outpatient study visits up to four hours each.First Steps to Join a Study: Learn study details, be pre-screened for eligibility, and consent to participate. Refer to study 03-M-0093.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling locally from the Washington, D.C. metro regionTo find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-301-496-9576 [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].If you have ever suffered from postpartum depression (PPD) following childbirth, we would like you to call for information about participation in our study. The study is designed to determine if your PPD was caused by hormonal changes during or after pregnancy. This study will replicate a hormonal state of pregnancy and the 6-week period following delivery. Mood symptoms and hormone levels will be measured throughout the study.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling locally from the Washington, D.C. metro regionTo find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-301-496-9576 [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].If you have ever suffered from postpartum depression (PPD) following childbirth, we would like you to call for information about participation in our study. The study is designed to determine if your PPD was caused by hormonal changes during or after pregnancy. This study will replicate a hormonal state of pregnancy and the 6-week period following delivery. Mood symptoms and hormone levels will be measured throughout the study.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling locally from the Washington, D.C. metro regionTo find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-301-496-9576 [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].If you have ever suffered from postpartum depression (PPD) following childbirth, we would like you to call for information about participation in our study. The study is designed to determine if your PPD was caused by hormonal changes during or after pregnancy. This study will replicate a hormonal state of pregnancy and the 6-week period following delivery. Mood symptoms and hormone levels will be measured throughout the study.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling locally from the Washington, D.C. metro regionTo find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-301-402-2352 [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].This outpatient study seeks healthy children between the ages of 8 and 17 to participate in research on mood and anxiety disorders. The study investigates how the brain changes during computer-based training tasks and how breathing patterns and emotions are related. Procedures include psychological interviews, a physical exam, lab work, and brain scans.The study is conducted at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland. Your child may be eligible if he/she is interested and has your consent to participate medically healthy, free of current or past history of psychiatric illness, not currently taking any medication.First steps to participate include, calling NIMH, learning study details, asking about your eligibility, and consenting to participate. There is no cost to participate and compensation is provided.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling locally from the Washington, D.C. metro regionTo find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-301-402-2352 [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].This outpatient study seeks healthy children between the ages of 8 and 17 to participate in research on mood and anxiety disorders. The study investigates how the brain changes during computer-based training tasks and how breathing patterns and emotions are related. Procedures include psychological interviews, a physical exam, lab work, and brain scans.The study is conducted at the NIH Clinical Center in Bethesda, Maryland. Your child may be eligible if he/she is interested and has your consent to participate medically healthy, free of current or past history of psychiatric illness, not currently taking any medication.First steps to participate include, calling NIMH, learning study details, asking about your eligibility, and consenting to participate. There is no cost to participate and compensation is provided.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJoin a Research Study: Enrolling nationally from around the countryTo find out if you qualify, email NIMH or call 1-301-827-1350 [TTY: 1-866-411-1010].This research study seeks to find causes and treatments of depression in teenagers. The study goals are to increase our knowledge of treatments for depression and understand how the brain changes when teenagers have depression. The study will also compare teenagers with depression to those without mental health diagnoses as they grow up.The study is recruiting participants ages 11-17 who are depressed. They must have a pediatrician or other medical provider, be medically healthy, and able to perform research tasks. They may not currently be hospitalized, psychotic or actively suicidal. Teenagers with depression are eligible even if they are taking medication.Study participation begins with an outpatient evaluation that includes clinical assessment, interviews, and questionnaires.All clinical evaluations, research tasks and visits are free of cost. Participants are compensated for research activities. Parents and teenager must agree to the teenager’s participation in research.The studies are conducted at the NIH in Bethesda, Maryland and enroll participants from the local area and from across the United States. Transportation expenses are reimbursed by NIMH.VideoThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDate/Time: November 7, 2016Location: Rockville, MDThe NIMH Division of AIDS Research sponsored a workshop to identify significant and unique courses of study aimed at elucidating the complex behavioral and biological relationships between stress and HIV. The meeting convened 15 thought leaders in HIV clinical immunology, infectious disease, neurology, neuroendocrinology, neuropsychology, psychiatry, and psychology. The workshop focused on four essential areas pertinent to stress and HIV: 1) stress-induced immune changes and implications for HIV; 2) impact of stress and HIV on cognitive impairment; 3) psychosocial dynamics impacted by HIV and stress; and 4) implications of stress on HIV reservoir. The workshop provided a common basis to facilitate interactions among biologists and psychosocial scientists dedicated to understanding the relationships between HIV and stress.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDate/Time: October 19, 2018Location: Bethesda, MDDescription: National Institute of Mental Health Alliance for Research Progress October 2018 Meeting Summary, Agenda, and Participant ListThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJanuary 10, 2017"You lose your dreams, and you lose your hopes."Watch on YouTube.BILL: When you're in the middle of a depression, all you can think about is the misery and pain that you're suffering, and that it will continue forever. And you lose your dreams, and you lose your hopes. And that's when I think people then begin to give up, and say that the only thing left for me is to end this pain, and the only way I know how to end this pain is to commit suicide.Learn more about men and depression.More News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJanuary 10, 2017"The depression became an entity that I was able to identify."Watch on YouTube.MELVIN: The depression became an entity that I was able to identify. Sometimes I would actively and aggressively pick fights because I thought maybe I could beat it...I could physically beat the way I felt out of me or have someone else beat it out of me. I thought that if I just received a great enough shock to my system and physical trauma...it would force the depression out of me.Learn more about men and depression.More News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJanuary 10, 2017"Because you have to deal with it. It doesn't just go away."Watch on YouTube.PATRICK: I'd drink and I'd just get numb. I'd get numb to try to numb my head. I mean we're talkin' many, many beers to get to that state to where you could shut your head off. But then you wake up the next day and it's still there. Because you have to deal with it. It doesn't just go away.Learn more about men and depression.More News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJanuary 10, 2017"I lost interest with the kids and doing the things that we used to do... you know, that families do."Watch on YouTube.RENE: I lost interest with the kids and doing the things that we used to do, going to the movies, just simple things...nothing... you know that families do. Ya know, they'd ask their mother, "Why is Daddy not getting up and not wanting to do anything with us? Did we do anything?" They didn't do anything to me. It was just, I didn't want to do anything.Learn more about men and depression.More News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJanuary 10, 2017"Yo nunca escuchado de un hombre latino teniendo depresión."Watch on YouTube.RODOLFO: Algunas veces ah, algunas mujeres tienen depresión pero ... e ... yo nunca escuchado de un hombre latino teniendo depresión ... solamente no pasa. Y ... y hasta cuando uno dice que uno tiene depresión nadie te cree.Learn more about men and depression.More News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJanuary 10, 2017"Being Latino made it harder because there's a silence over things."Watch on YouTube.RODOLFO: Being Latino makes it harder, because there's this silence over things. There's just things that you don't talk about. And, when I told my parents I had depression, I was like, "Look Mom, I'm depressed, you know, I can't deal with things anymore. I don't think I can finish school." My mom was like, "You're not depressed. Your brother went through a period. You know what, you're going to get over it."Learn more about men and depression.More News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJanuary 10, 2017"Something that used to make you happy makes you cry now for no reason."Watch on YouTube.SHAWN: Something that used to make you happy makes you cry now for no reason. You don't understand why. You're sitting there looking at something that used to make you laugh...and all you want to do is cry. Then you just decide to not let anything make you feel anything. It's easier to feel nothing than it is to feel pain and hurt or sadness.Learn more about men and depression.More News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJanuary 10, 2017"It just simply invades every pore of your skin."Watch on YouTube.STEVE: It just simply invades every pore of your skin. It affects the way you think, it affects the way you feel, it affects the way you love, it affects the way you like. It has that incredible...it's just a blanket that covers everything, just covers everything. And it's one that's just so damned asphyxiating. And at times you just say, it's enough already. It just feels like enough.Learn more about men and depression.More News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuSeptember 26, 2017Watch on YouTube.[music]Ryan Beveridge: Okay. Hello, everyone. This is Ryan Beveridge from the University of Delaware, and I'd like to welcome you to the second webinar in our series. This is a series focusing on the science-to-service pipeline in psychology and psychiatry. The series is the result of a collaboration between the Delaware Project, the NIMH RDoC unit, and ABCT, who all share a mutual interest in studying the development and the advancement of science-based treatments in the community. We're really happy that you joined us. Thanks for taking your time to join this conversation with us. I hope the webinar will be as interesting to you as it has been to us putting it together. We've really enjoyed our conversations with all these experts, talking about these issues. We'll be focusing today's webinar on basic science that looks at the brain's reward system, and its potential role in depression, the treatment implications of this work, and dissemination and implementation science that's relevant to getting this work out to the community. There are several objectives for the series, and they all relate to rising to the challenge of developing intervention science that's cohesive and interdependent and impactful for the community.Ryan Beveridge: Throughout the series, we want to inspire new dialogue that crosses different areas of intervention-related research, and creates innovative new research projects, as well as practice. Consistent with the ideas from RDoC, we'll focus this series on a mechanism-based approach that has the potential to advance our understanding of psychopathology, to inform intervention targets, and to facilitate the implementation of more efficient and person-specific interventions. This effort comes as we recognize the enormous global burden of mental health conditions on society. It's Suicide Prevention Awareness Month, as most of you know, and as one example of the mental health burden on society we're currently experiencing, I'd like to mention these sobering facts about suicide from this year, from the World Health Organization. We know that as deaths from cancer, and heart disease, and-- some forms of cancer, and diabetes are all declining, we haven't been as successful at preventing suicide. So our efforts through this series is to develop and train a more impactful intervention science and practice, and we believe that's of paramount importance. The burden of mental health conditions on society may partially be related to a traditional intervention science process that too often has consisted on unidirectional information flow, from basic laboratory research to intervention development to efficacy trials, and this siloing off of community research from the laboratory may be key in why we see the science-to-service gap that we all seek to narrow.Ryan Beveridge: After this laboratory work is completed, oftentimes researchers field the dragons that are out in the community, that keeps them from going out and doing research in the community, and we lose internal validity, things like that. It's not viewed as traditionally as clinical science to do effective research, or dissemination and implementation research, and, to borrow a phrase, what happens in the lab stays in the lab too often, and we don't want that to happen anymore, so we're interested in developing crosstalk, and an intervention science division that is integrated in nature. This vision was forwarded at the Delaware Project in this paper by [inaudible] that was published in 2014, and it brings effectiveness research and dissemination implementation research into the fold, so each of these areas are not siloed off, and they can inform one another, so that we create interventions that are based on sound mechanism research, but also effective in community mental health settings, where those who need it most will benefit. We believe in the bidirectional flow between these different areas of research, where one informs the other to create an impactful science.Ryan Beveridge: This model will be exemplified in our webinar today, where we'll have three distinguished experts crosstalking with one another, and with us, about their area of expertise, and the challenges and opportunities in this area of research and practice. Our three speakers today are Dr. Greg Hajcak, who will discuss the reward system of the brain, and its potential role in psychopathology; Dr. Dana McMakin, who will talk about the treatment implication of this work; and Dr. Mary Beth Connolly Gibbons, who will discuss the relevant findings from dissemination and implementation research. Each expert will take approximately 10 to 15 minutes to present their work, and discuss the translational implications. Then we'll have about 30 minutes for open discussion, where you, the audience, can submit questions to the experts in comments using the question and answer utility that you should see at the bottom of your screen. We have a large and diverse audience today, which is exciting to us, but it includes researchers, clinicians, policy makers, and since our integrative aim is to foster discussion across these disparate interests, we encourage you to ask some of the hard questions that have traditionally contributed to these siloed-off areas of our intervention science and of practice, and we hope that your questions, and the discussion that transpires, will ultimately lead to productive, new advances in intervention science.Ryan Beveridge: So, with that short intro, I'd like to hand it off to Dr. Greg Hajcak, who will be talking about the reward system in the brain. Greg?Greg Hajcak: Thanks very much. It's exciting to get to provide a very brief overview of reward neuroscience and its intersection with psychopathology today. I thought I'd start by just talking about general questions about why one might want to focus on reward. I think there's been a lot of basic and translational work on reward. There's a figure here from Nassar's groundbreaking work on the reward system in animals, and that work, and human work that I'll tell you about has led to fairly well-defined neural networks, so we have a good sense of the brain's reward network, which involves midbrain dopamine systems, medial prefrontal cortex, and regions of the basal ganglia. I'll focus particular on the striatum, but from the intersection with clinical phenomenon, I think that one might focus on reward particularly, because reward-related dysfunction has been related to anhedonia, or the inability to experience pleasure. When you think of anhedonia, you might think first about depression, and there's been converging evidence across behavioral FMRI and EEG measures for anhedonic deficits and major depressive disorder, but I think it's really important to point out that anhedonia is evident across many other disorders, including schizophrenia, substance use disorders, neurodegenerative disorders like Alzheimer's and Parkinson's as well, and for developmentally inclined folks, I think that there's a really interesting parallel development of depression and the reward circuit function.Greg Hajcak: So we know in adolescence that there's a precipitous increase in depression and depressive symptoms, and, similarly, it appears that the reward circuit is undergoing some pretty non-linear changes during adolescence, and linking the focus on reward back to NIMH's research domain criteria, threat and reward are both fundamental motivational systems that have been implicated across many different forms of psychology, and I think what's particularly exciting about reward is that it can be studied in both human and non-human animals across all sorts of units of analysis, and I'll touch on that soon. I'll be focusing in particular on initial responsiveness to reward, which is a subconstruct. I was involved in a proposed restructuring of the positive valance domain, and I raise this to just make the point that I'll be talking about initial response to reward, but that's really only one subconstruct of things like reward responsiveness. And when you think of these constructs, you really want to ask yourself, well, how would I study this, which asks the question about what kind of reward tasks you can use, and I'm just going to highlight a few that are pretty common. There's a probabilistic reward task, which measures behavioral changes based on reward contingencies. This was developed by Diego Pizzagalli, and it assesses probabilistic and reinforcement learning subconstructs of reward. Probably the most neuroimage task out there is the monetary incentive delay task, developed by Brian Knutsen and colleagues, and this task is interesting insofar as it allows you to derive neural and behavioral measures of reward receipt and anticipation, and what I'll be talking about for a few minutes are just really simple gambling tasks, where we can evaluate neural measures in response to receiving reward and loss when outcomes are fully equal probable, and I think these tasks are ideally suited for assessing neural measures of initial response to reward, because there's not much else you can look at.Greg Hajcak: So just to give you a sense, the gambling paradigm we use is called the doors task. It's incredibly straightforward. On each trial, you see two doors, and you tell each participant that they can win money or lose money on each trial, and they're told to pick a door, and then they receive either a downward-pointing red arrow, indicating that they've lost a quarter, or they receive a upward-pointing green arrow, indicating that they've won 50 cents. The important thing here is that outcomes are equally probable, and it's not unlike going to Las Vegas insofar as when we debrief people, people have various beliefs about how they did - that some did well, some didn't - but they tend to actually enjoy this kind of task, and when we look at the neural response to reward in this kind of simple gambling task, we see all of their regions of the reward circuit become active, from ventral striatum to amygdala, medial prefrontal cortex, orbital frontal cortex, and so this is hearkening back to the first slide, where we were looking at the non-human animal reward circuit, and we see similar things in humans. A lot of my work focuses on event-related brain potentials, which are scalp-recorded measures of neural activity that have excellent temporal resolution, and our work-- here I'm showing just two event-related brain potentials where negative is plotted up, and what you can see is right around 300 milliseconds after feedback, there's this relative positivity when you win money compared to when you lose, and our group and others have referred to this as the reward positivity, and what's nice is in the same subjects, we've shown that the reward positivity and activity in the ventral striatum and the medial prefrontal cortex are correlated when subjects do the task in both the EEG and FMRI.Greg Hajcak: So there's some evidence that you can get convergent validity and construct validity using multiple neural imaging measures. I'm also particularly excited about studying these initial neural responses to reward, because they have good psychometric properties. So, for instance, we've shown in both adolescents and adults that the reward positivity has good internal reliability, and has pretty decent test-retest reliability as well, and we've also found in a large sample of adolescents that the striatal response to reward has good internal consistency. But I think the most exciting findings, actually, are a series of replicated effects in depression, so, for instance, we and others have found that there's a reduced or blunted reward positivity in relation to depression, and, similarly, you see replicated effects in depression related to a reduced FMRI response to reward, and that's really just a selective overview. I think probably the very most exciting findings are that a number of groups have found that both the reward positivity and striatal response to reward relate to risk, and can predict increases in depression prospectively. So the studies here on the left are ERP studies, and the studies on the right are FMRI studies, and all of these studies have shown that blunted response to reward can prospectively predict increases in depression, or novel major depressive episodes, and I think the vast majority of these actually control for other usual suspects, in terms of risk factors.Greg Hajcak: Just to give you one data slide, this is from a recent study from our group where we looked at the reward positivity in about 500 adolescent girls who were never depressed at baseline. Of those, 404 did not go on to experience a depressive disorder 18 months later, and on the right are 40 girls who went on to have a first onset depressive episode, and, at baseline, you can see that there was a reduced reward response in the girls who would go on to develop a first onset depressive disorder, and these data were true even when you controlled for other known risk factors, like maternal history of depression, baseline depressive symptoms, and so on. We found these in some other data sets, too, but I just wanted to highlight some relatively large-n studies that show that you can use these measures to predict risk.Greg Hajcak: I think, despite the excitement, there's tons of room for future opportunities. One of the things I highlighted briefly was the issue of convergent validity. I think this is too rarely evaluated. We tend not to look across different measures, and I think this is one challenge within the RDoC framework about how do you integrate across different levels of analysis? What types of correlations should we expect between behavior, FMRI, and ERP measures? In our hands, those correlations have been relatively weak, but sensible, and I think that one of the other things we've been concerned about is looking at these reward-related measures across tasks. So even some tasks that are superficially similar may not show a ton of overlap in terms of the neural response measures. I think this is an important opportunity for future research. I think that we're at the point where it would be useful to start thinking about demonstrating the utility of large-scale neural assessments. I think, in fact, there are cost-effective measures that we could use in relatively large-scale studies that might be useful in predicting risk, or identifying those at greatest risk for psychopathology.Greg Hajcak: And, of course, I only highlighted this initial responsiveness to reward element, but there are lots of other aspects or conceptions of reward, and I know Dana McMakin's going to talk about some of this, too, but there's a distinction between liking and wanting, from Berridge and his work, and there's other forms of reward, for instance social reward, and I've only highlighted monetary reward tasks. I think for those of us who are interested in developmental issues, that the timing of assessment and intervention prevention is another future opportunity. So when should we be assessing the reward system? When is it the most important to get an indicator of reward system function?Greg Hajcak: And then finally I'll end with two kind of future opportunity questions that I think will be a relatively good transition to the next talk. One is, are reward-related neural measures a novel target for existing treatments? We can ask these kinds of questions, and we can ask things like, does behavioral activation potentiate the initial response to reward, or maybe behavioral activation is most appropriate for those who are low in initial response to reward? And I think it also might be useful for thinking about parsing the heterogeneity of psychopathology in novel ways. So I think these are some of one possible sets of questions that we could ask in future work, but I think, for me, a more exciting possibility is that reward-related neural measures might be a novel target for absolutely novel treatments, and instead we could ask the question of what things increase initial response to reward, and then we could chase and define and optimize and design new treatments that do those things.Greg Hajcak: And so I think I'm going to wrap up there, and turn things over to Dana McMakin, who's going to actually talk more about the intervention science.Dana McMakin: Okay, so in this next talk we're going to move from that basic science that Dr. Hajcak was discussing about reward sensitivity as it relates to depression to the translation of that science into intervention strategies. So, based on the basic science just reviewed, a number of intervention strategies to target reward sensitivity have been proposed. So first, pharmacologic approaches to depression have long had putative reward targets, including enhancing dopamine signalling, and research is now examining the specificity of those effects, or the opportunities to impact reward sensitivity. Deep brain stimulation involves surgically implanting a neurostimulator in the brain, and a seminal pilot study in 2008 demonstrated that targeting a reward-related region, called the nucleus accumbens in the striatum, it was possible to reduce depressive symptoms in treatment-refractory adults. So there have been some exciting but also mixed outcomes since that time, and this remains a really active area of science. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation is a more non-invasive procedure where we're using magnetic field pulses to stimulate regions of the cortex to try to impact large-scale neural networks. There's increasing attention now to more theory-driven application of TMS to specific networks, including reward-related networks, as well as using FMRI to try to increase the precision and localization of TMS.Dana McMakin: So those translational approaches that I just reviewed share a goal of directly manipulating the brain, or the brain's neurochemistry, but where we're going to focus our attention today is on translational science that aims to use psychotherapy to alter brain activity and function. This can be a really challenging bridge, because we're moving from relatively specific mechanistic studies in basic science to broad cognitive behavioral and emotional processes that are embedded within real world social complexity. But it's likely a worthy goal, because there's strong evidence across many areas of science that the brain is highly plastic and responsive to environmental inputs, such as those that we can utilize in psychotherapy. Within the psychotherapy literature, the most obvious candidate for targeting reward sensitivity is behavior activation. Behavior activation, BA, aims to increase environmental reinforcement, and it's essentially the B part of CBT for depression. It's also been used as a standalone treatment.Dana McMakin: But most relevant to our discussion today is a BA strategy referred to as pleasant event planning, where therapists and clients come together, and they try to schedule pleasurable activities to increase environmental reinforcement. So a key question raised at the end of Dr. Hajcak's talk was whether patients with higher symptoms of anhedonia, or altered neural markers of reward sensitivity, might be more responsive to these BA strategies, because we already have these strategies in our treatment arsenal, so if they're more responsive, this could be a way to personalize interventions by using BA. So, there's early evidence, from studies that look at symptoms, that anhedonia is predictive of response to behavior activation, either as part of CBT or as a standalone treatment, and in early pilot studies, there's some evidence that reward sensitivity at baseline, as observed using the FMRI tasks just described, does predict BA outcomes as well. But there's a whole lot more to parse here, for example, whether higher anhedonia and reward sensitivity predicts better or worse outcomes varies by study and varies by approach.Dana McMakin: A second question also raised by Dr. Hajcak is whether BA leads to treatment-related change in reward sensitivity and anhedonia. Again, we have very few studies that directly address this question, but in general, there's not robust evidence that BA uniquely impacts anhedonia or approach-related behavior, at least per self-report. There have been some signals of change in FMRI studies, however, which is very promising, and it suggests that we may be able to learn something unique from neuroimaging. So that is, maybe we're impacting the target of reward sensitivity, but we need to increase that dose in order to actually see an impact on symptoms. There are a number of limitations here, so, for example, studies that have looked at anhedonia have included suboptimal measures of anhedonia with only a question or two. The early FMRI studies have been critical to advancing our field, but they are mostly with open trials, mostly fewer than 10 patients, using different reward tasks and analytic approaches, and these different approaches have led to different results, across studies and within studies. So, for example, looking at anticipation of reward as opposed to initial response to reward yields different findings.Dana McMakin: So, we don't really have time to review each study in detail today, but the take-home points I want to make here are the following. Number one, we're getting a signal here that is exciting and worth pursuing, and number two, the nuances of these outcomes are not just a nuisance, but they matter both methodologically as well as conceptually. It may be these very nuances that help us to use neuroscience to move beyond what we already know from symptoms and behavior. So to make progress on that, we really need to use solid theories to guide our design decisions, and we also need to keep in mind our clinical goal, which is to address the need to personalize our interventions, to heterogeneous symptoms and to individuals. So how can translational neuroscience help us to make that kind of clinical progress. First, to address what might work and why, we can turn to neuroscience theory. So an important distinction made my Kent Berridge and others is this idea between liking and wanting, or, liking refers to the consumatory experience of pleasure, and wanting refers to repetitive motivation toward reward. So we often want things we like, and vice versa, but this is not always a one-to-one correspondence, and these two features of reward sensitivity are related but separate. So, for example, dopamine systems are really more tied to wanting, as opposed to liking.Dana McMakin: Accordingly, recent literature has made a distinction between motivational anhedonia and consummatory anhedonia, and it may be that these are two unique subtypes of anhedonia, or that one of these is more characteristic of depression relative to other disorders. Another area of research gaining momentum is the sustainability of pleasure. So after we experience something rewarding, it doesn't usually end there. We reactivate memories of our rewarding experiences, we stay in pleasure through mental replay, reminiscent savoring, social sharing, et cetera, and again, here we see individual differences, where depressed individuals show a faster fading of pleasure, on the order of minutes as well as on the order of months and years, and Aaron Heller and others have demonstrated that this failure to sustain pleasure is associated with differences in connectivity, and activation in reward-related circuitry. So replaying our positive life moments and sustaining pleasure might seem like a kind of superfluous activity, but it likely plays a key role in how our brain learns about rewards, and stabilizes representations and expectancies that later can be drawn upon to drive our motivation to approach goals, even in the face of obstacles. So, in a sense, perhaps this process is how daily pleasure becomes linked with motivational drives and behavior.Dana McMakin: So with all this in mind, let's now turn back to BA and pleasant event planning. One of the biggest clinical challenges here is that clients struggle to follow through with plans, commonly saying, "I didn't feel like it," or "I didn't want to." So as therapists, we often help to create behavioral contingencies, and we encourage clients to really engage cognitive control to overrule that amotivation or lack of drive, a just do it mentality. But maybe there are ways to draw on reward sensitivity to increase success here, but before we get there, let's use an example to really demonstrate what this model looks like when we move beyond controlled rat models to human life. Perhaps a healthy teenager, Julissa, we'll call her, decides that joining the swim team is something that may bring her pleasure. So she gets there on the first day, so she approaches the potential reward, but then she consciously or subconsciously engages strategies to increase her pleasure. For example, maybe she notices her weightlessness in the water, she feels the warmth of her muscles as they engage, and she appreciates the social support of her teammates. After swimming, she takes a nice hot shower in the locker room, and reflects on how accomplished she feels, how great it felt to be in the water, maybe she posts something on Snapchat for her friends to see, maybe she tells stories about swimming to her family at dinner and they revel with her. And then, two days later, as she's packing for swim practice, Julissa feels pleasure all over again, because she imagines seeing her friends at practice, feeling weightless in the water, and feeling accomplished again when it's all over. So it's these processes that may help to rev those motivational engines, and tip the likelihood that she will feel like approaching that next swim practice, and then perpetuate a positive behavioral cycle.Dana McMakin: So a number of scientists, including Michelle Craske, Emily Holmes, and myself, have been working on intervention strategies that may be able to draw on some of these insights from neuroscience. The intervention strategies that are in various stages of testing include, for example, positive attentional bias training, savoring the moment, and learning to be mindful of pleasant experiences as ways to really enhance that liking experience; sustaining pleasure, or reactivating memories via savoring or memory training to help to consolidate positive aspects of experiences; pre-savoring, or activating imagery to anticipate pleasant or successful aspects of an experience. And so there's a long way to go here to validate these strategies, and to isolate their impact on features of reward sensitivity, but the long term hope is that the insights we're gaining from neuroscience and these theories can help us to clarify the types of research designs, tasks, and analytic approaches that are really necessary to make progress.Dana McMakin: So for whom might these strategies work is another question. It's not yet clear whether these approaches might be best for those at extreme ends of a deficit continuum, or as a way to capitalize on a more intact reward system. So also, can modules be applied to anhedonia across disorders, and, if not, how can neuroscience help us unpack what makes anhedonia different across different disorders? And for comorbid disorders that share aberrant reward function, like depression and substance abuse, might it be beneficial to target these shared features as a priority in treatment? And finally, the when. Neuroscience may be able to help us identify sensitive periods, when the brain is really extra responsive and receptive to certain kinds of environmental inputs. In adolescents, we see a threefold rise in depression rates around puberty, at the same time that there are dramatic, normative changes in reward circuitry, [inaudible] reward sensitivity, and, in fact, a growing literature now suggests that the developmental changes that happen in reward-related circuitry around the onset of puberty may go awry for youth who are at risk for depression, and play a key role in the path of physiology of the disease. Targeted interventions in at-risk youth during this time of development could shape neurodevelopment, and potentially reduce risk. Elizabeth McCauley and colleagues have developed a BA protocol for adolescents, so maybe it will now be possible to look at whether BA has more uniquely powerful effects in early adolescence, relative to other times, and also to look at the impacts on neurodevelopment.Dana McMakin: And as we continue to learn more about the brain, we may also identify other strategies that capitalize on this developmental period. So overall, we're seeing early signals that interventions that aim to target reward sensitivity are really doing just that. However, there is a very long way to go to validate those science, isolate outcome variables, and do more highly controlled work. Ultimately, the nuances we see may really hold the key to improving targeted treatments and outcomes, while also having the opportunity to deepen our understanding of the disorders themselves. The challenges to this work are not small. There are nearly infinite levels of specificity when it comes to mechanistic targets, reaching all the way down to the molecular level. So what level of precision do we really need in the context of targeted psychotherapy trials? If we go too broad, we might miss the mark on how neuroscience can actually move us beyond what we're already doing, and if we're too specific, we might get so mired up in details that we miss the much-needed opportunity to have a near-term clinical impact for those who are suffering. So we could spend years in the pipeline fiddling with strategies, only to find they're really a mismatch with either client needs or the way treatments are delivered, and I know Dr. Connolly Gibbons is going to be speaking a bit about this in just a moment.Dana McMakin: So I'll just conclude by saying, as scientists, we can't be experts in everything, and the solution, I think, is to engage interdisciplinary teams, so that the entire pipeline, from basic science to treatment dissemination, is in view, and based on the data that I and others have presented and will present today, I think reward sensitivity is one of the promising focal points for translational research to make progress, and have potential for impact. So, with that, I will turn this over to Dr. Connolly Gibbons.Connolly Gibbons: Thank you. [silence] Okay, thank you. I'm going to try to build on some of the information that Dr. McMakin and Dr. Hajcak have presented. I'm part of the Center for Psychotherapy Research at the University of Pennsylvania, where we've had a program of research for 15 plus years, where we evaluate evidence-based psychotherapies in the community mental health setting. So I'm going to try to build on that experience to talk about the dissemination and implementation challenges that clinicians might face when trying to use these evidence-based strategies to target reward sensitivity in the community setting. Oh, so once again, I can't move my slides. Give me one moment. So I have three goals today. First, I want to describe to you a trial of behavioral activation to target reward sensitivity that we currently have ongoing in a community mental health setting. Next, based on our program of research over the years, I'd like to explore some of the challenges to implementing evidence-base psychotherapies in these community settings, and finally, I'd like to explore some of the strategies that we think might be helpful to address these challenges when we implement these interventions to target reward sensitivity.Connolly Gibbons: So let me first tell you briefly about the trial we have ongoing. We're evaluating the effectiveness of behavioral activation for adults with major depressive disorder. It's currently ongoing in the community mental health setting, so the consumers that are part of the project are all consumers who are seeking services for depression at the community center. The clinicians are all employed by the community center, and have volunteered to have additional expert training in behavioral activation. This trial takes an experimental therapeutics approach, so our goal is to confirm that the community patients that have deficits in reward motivation benefit most from behavioral activation in this setting. So to measure this target, we're using effort expenditure for reward task at baseline. Our second goal is to confirm some of the evidence-based change mechanisms in this community setting. So I want to mention that what we're talking today is about developing both novel approaches to address reward sensitivity, but also to adapt existing approaches. So although behavioral activation in this context isn't necessarily novel, I think this approach has great value. Our hope is that we can learn more about which patients in the community are actually going to benefit most from this treatment, and by doing a deeper exploration of the change mechanisms in the community, we might be able to learn how to adapt and even focus this treatment to optimize outcomes.Connolly Gibbons: So I don't have the results from our current, ongoing trial today, but building on our experiences so far in that trial, as well as our experiences across the last 15 plus years, I want to talk about some of the challenges to implementing some of these evidence-based treatments. The consolidated framework for implementation research covers a vast array of possible factors that might impede implementation success. I'm going to talk today just about two factors that we have found to be most salient in our program of research. So, in the outer setting, I want to speak about the patient needs and resources, and here, I want to focus specifically on the very high patient attrition from services in the community. Second, I want to focus on, within characteristics of individuals involved-- I want to focus on the attitudes of the community clinicians, and how that may influence implementation success. So let's start with the attitudes of clinicians. What we've learned in our training program over the years is that in the community mental health setting, most of the clinicians describe themselves as eclectic in practice, and the majority are very interested in gaining new therapeutic tools. What we've also learned is that most of the clinicians, though, have very strong identities in one therapeutic camp. So as we think about how to develop these interventions to address reward sensitivity, we have to be sensitive to the fact that most of the clinicians may not be interested in completely replacing their therapeutic approach, even if they are interested in gaining new tools. Some of the other problems we've faced is that, despite the motivation on the clinician's part to receive this additional training, most of them find that they're very busy, and they don't have time for the training. Some of them have found that they don't want the additional supervision, and finally, there's very high turnover of employment in the community, so many of the clinicians leave employment before they complete the training.Connolly Gibbons: So, to give you an example from one of our most recent clinical trials in the community mental health setting, we evaluated two evidence-based psychotherapies for major depression. We recruited and trained 41 community clinicians already employed at the center. They all volunteered, were very motivated to receive additional training in evidence-based treatment, but only 20 of them actually made it through the training and received ratings of confidence in the treatment. So a whopping 40%, once they started, were just too busy to participate. Another 27% didn't want supervision. Some of these clinicians felt that they already had tremendous expertise in a particular modality. Some of them felt that they were already doing some of the interventions that we were presenting. In addition, another 20% left the employment before they completed the training, so this really presents a challenge for taking comprehensive packages to address reward sensitivity into the community mental health setting. So what are some of the strategies we might use? I think that one of the first strategies we have to do is improve the implementation climate of the inner setting. So the first strategy is that we have to improve the compatibility of these new interventions, so that they're acceptable in the community. So in the behavioral activation trial that we have ongoing, we started with a phase where we worked with community clinicians and supervisors to develop the training materials. This can sometimes take the form of developing addendum manuals that are more usable and feasible in the community setting.Connolly Gibbons: The second thing we have to do is focus on the learning climate. We have to work with the community stakeholders to develop feasible training approaches, and unfortunately, for this item, I don't think we have easy answers at this point. I think it's the collaboration that's going to lead us towards feasible training approaches, but I think more research is needed to understand how we train community clinicians in comprehensive, evidence-based treatments in the time that they have allotted. Another strategy that we think might be helpful is thinking about using clinician feedback systems. So in our behavioral activation trial, we've shown that there are reliable and valid measures of the targets of treatment that are feasible in the community setting. We might consider, can we take some of this measurement information and feed it back to the clinician in a way that might motivate them and educate them to use the treatment? So we've had some experience using electronic feedback systems in the community, where consumers are asked to complete electronic measures of barriers to treatment, symptom targets, mechanisms of change, and we're able to produce automated electronic reports for the clinicians. What we found interesting in our last trial is that the number one way that clinicians use these reports was to sit down with the patient and review the report together, and both clinician and consumer found this very useful, so one wonders whether some kind of reports that could feed back some of the treatment targets we're talking about might help educate the clinician. It might help the dyad work together to focus on these new interventions.Connolly Gibbons: Another strategy I think we're going to have to consider at this point, as we're developing novel treatments, and as we're adapting existing treatments to address reward sensitivity, is we may consider implementing specific intervention modules. So briefer modules, that are fewer sessions but very focused on interventions, might be more easily integrated into clinicians' usual therapeutic approach, and we now have a number of examples where these modular approaches to treatment are both highly acceptable to community clinicians, and equally effective to full therapeutic packages. I think the focus we're talking about, focusing on treatment targets, provides a formula for us on how do we develop these psychotherapy modules without watering down the treatment that we're talking about? So Dr. Hajcak talked about initial response to reward. Our study is focusing on evaluating motivation for reward, and Dr. McMakin is talking about a range of techniques to address wanting versus liking. So I think if we think about maybe developing briefer modules that are focused on these domains within the broad construct of reward sensitivity, we might be able to improve uptake of these interventions in the real world of treatment delivery.Connolly Gibbons: The second challenge I want to talk about is the extremely high patient attrition from services in the CMHC setting. This isn't unique to the CMHC setting, so a national database shows that the average number of psychotherapy sessions attended in routine practice in this country is only four. So, to give you an example of what I mean in the community mental health setting, our most recent clinical trial in the community, we recruited 237 consumers who were seeking treatment for depression, and we randomized them to two evidence-based psychotherapies. We had very high attrition that was very similar to what they see in the treatment as usual at these centers. So 27% essentially had no treatment. These are the patients that come for an intake session, and then disappear, or come for only one psychotherapy session and disappear. An additional 29% had what we would consider minimal exposure to the psychotherapy, so these patients received six or fewer sessions.Connolly Gibbons: So what do we do about this very high attrition when we're trying to take these treatments to target reward sensitivity into the community? One of our ideas is to think very strongly about this attrition problem, so we're developing our treatments to target deficits in reward functioning. Our thought is that we also need to personalize these treatments to improve engagement to begin with, and I think the best path to this is to explore the patient variables that might predict engagement in the treatments to target reward sensitivity. So, to give you an idea, in our previous trial, trauma history turned out to be an extremely important variable. So although we were providing evidence-based psychotherapies that had strong data supporting their mechanisms of chance, the patients that had very high trauma histories were much more likely to drop out early from treatment, and much less likely to complete the treatment. So even as we develop a treatment that might target deficits in reward functioning that might ultimately benefit a patient, we have to think about what variables are going to keep the patients from engaging to begin with.Connolly Gibbons: And I think the target that we're focused on today is a good example. We're talking about deficits and reward functioning. These are patients that are likely to have poor motivation for reward. This alone might keep them from participating in the psychotherapy that ultimately might provide them with benefit. So I think in our behavioral activation trial, we've built in a broad battery of possible patient measures at baseline, and we're going to explore which of those characteristics are going to predict engagement in the service, and I think as we develop these treatments, then we're going to have to think about what techniques can we build in to engage the patients in treatment before we go on to use the specific interventions to target reward sensitivity.Connolly Gibbons: So in conclusion, today, I think the interventions that we're talking about to target reward sensitivity do have great potential to improve outcomes in the community. But as we develop novel treatments and adapt existing treatments, we have to take seriously both the clinician attitudes in the community, and also the very high patient attrition from services. We need to work on improving the implementation climate as we bring these treatments into the community, and, at this point, when we're developing them, we have to think about how to adapt the interventions now, so that we can improve uptake in the community. Our panel today has tried to show that an experimental therapeutics approach, that develops and adapts interventions to address what we know about reward-related dysfunction, while also taking into account these real world implementation challenges, may have the best success at addressing this science-to-service gap that we've witnessed. Thank you.Ryan Beveridge: Okay. Thanks, everyone on the panel. This is a difficult task, as I'm sure you can all imagine, to talk translationally across these different areas of intervention science. So we have a bunch of good questions coming in for the panelists. If you haven't already submitted a question, and you have something you'd like to ask our panel, please go ahead and submit that down the Q and A tool at the bottom of the screen, and we'll ask these questions sort of thematically, and skip around. We probably won't get to all of them, but we'll get to as many as we can. Several people have asked about the role of the reward system in comorbid disorders, so we're focusing on depression and anhedonia in this webinar, but people have asked about the role of the reward system in ADHD and borderline personality disorder and anxiety-- those sorts of things. So I'd like to direct that to our panel. Greg, could you take a stab at that first?Greg Hajcak: Yeah, sure thing. Can you hear me?Ryan Beveridge: Yep.Greg Hajcak: Okay. Yeah, I think it's a great question. I was sort of following along a little with the Q and A, and, I mean, I think that a bunch of things come to mind. I mean, in schizophrenia in particular, it's almost odd that they-- the studies in schizophrenia have actually suggested in terms of things like the reward positivity, that it's completely intact in the face of the fact that every other thing that we have examined in schizophrenia seems abnormal. So, in schizophrenia, where you clearly have evidence of anhedonic deficits, you seem to also have an intact reward positivity in the face of abnormal or blunted brain activity of every other sort. So I think that's a real puzzle, and I think that some suggestions for how that could be come from other work that suggests, for individuals with schizophrenia, it may not be that that initial responsiveness to reward is actually impaired, but maybe it's something like a working memory deficit, to be able to hold that experience on line and to guide future behaviors. In somebody asked about ADHD, and I think that literature's a bit mixed, actually. There's a really nice study from Clay Holroyd's group looking at reward-related processes in ADHD, and it seems like poor control individuals, they kind of decrease in response to reward over time, or ADHD kids seem to increase in reward over time. There's work from the Netherlands. Van Meel's group has shown that kids with ADHD seem more responsive to rewards, which kind of makes some sense. The literature in addiction tends to suggest that one somebody's sort of in the throes of addiction, they're pretty blunted in their response to monetary rewards. Kind of as someone was suggesting in the Q and A that the drug of addiction kind of seems to hijack the reward system, take it over.Greg Hajcak: Yeah. I think someone else asked about remitted depression, or something like that, and would you see it in state versus trait, and there's a nice study from Anna Weinberg and Stew Shankman showing that remitted anhedonic depressives seem to also show this kind of blunted reward response, so at least there it seems like it's maybe more like a vulnerability marker. Those are the things that come to mind off the cuff. It's complicated, and I think this is why there's really a lot more work to do, kind of cross-diagnostically, large-scale studies need to be done, because typically our studies are designed to compare one small group of individuals with depression to a bunch of healthy controls, and that has kind of limited our ability to really generalize, and understand those kinds of questions.Ryan Beveridge: Great. Thanks, Greg. That was really helpful. Dana or Mary Beth, anything else on that topic? Any treatment implications you'd like to discuss, or dissemination topics?Connolly Gibbons: Well, I think one of the treatment implications we've started to think about, as we've started to use these measures to measure deficits in reward functioning, it has opened up our perspective, I think, to start thinking about-- whoops. Am I muted?Ryan Beveridge: No, I can hear.Connolly Gibbons: Okay. Thought I saw you. We've started to think about behavioral activation and how it might be applicable to other disorders, so I think once we start to focus on psychotherapies from this target perspective, it does help us think about broader applicability of the treatments. We're very early on, but we are starting to think about and test out some of these measures of reward dysfunctions with different populations, like those with substance use disorders, as well as those with remitted depression and current depression, so that we can build on that, and start thinking about whether behavioral activation might have broader applicability in the community.Ryan Beveridge: Thanks, Mary Beth. Dana, any comments?Dana McMakin: Yeah, I would just add-- I'm over here Google searching, because I'm trying to find the name of a treatment that I have come across that, to me, appears to be one of the first steps at looking at a targeted intervention using behavioral activation strategies for comorbid depression and substance abuse, and unfortunately I haven't been rapid enough in my Google searching to remind myself of the name of the developers of that, but I know that it's sort of something that's on people's mind, and on the agenda, and I think one thing we haven't talked about a lot today is by having clear theories and models, and then measurements for outcome, I think one of the nice things is that we can start to do things like try a treatment intervention like behavioral activation for comorbidity, and then look at what the outcome is, as a way to give us feedback about the disorders themselves. That is, if there's a part of this reward sensitivity that's intractable when in the presence of comorbidity, then maybe there's something else we don't understand about that particular disorder, and that could set us on the right track to making more progress with the basic science.Ryan Beveridge: Great. Thank you. Another question, shifting gears a little bit, is related to training. So one of the main focuses, obviously, of the Delaware Project, was what the implications are for this type of translational work across the different levels of trainees that people work with, whether it's graduate students, or postdocs, or medical students, interns-- what are your thoughts about how we might best train our trainees to think translationally across these different areas of intervention science? Anyone want to take a first shot at that? [crosstalk]Connolly Gibbons: Well, that's a tough one. I'm speaking, of course, from the perspective of training community clinicians. They're a little different than our trainees in that they all have tremendous clinical experience already, so, again, I think when we're training, one of the things we have to do is be very sensitive to the clinician's own expertise and what they already bring to the therapeutic process. So when I was talking about patients dropping out from treatment-- from the training process, we talked to each of the therapists as they decide I don't want to continue with this expert supervision, and although we get a lot of reasons, some of them even talk about feeling criticized in the supervision, or they're already doing some of the interventions we're talking about. So I think as we develop training programs, we do need to target it to whatever group we're training, and take into account the expertise they already have, and help them think about flexibility. They want to be able to use these techniques flexibly within their own program of practice. So I think we need to train in a way that helps them understand how they can bring these interventions into the therapeutic orientation they're already using.Ryan Beveridge: Great points. Thanks, Mary Beth. Clinicians training is a huge part of this effort. Greg or Dana, any thoughts on training?Dana McMakin: Yeah, I think I would just add to that, that the more that our training early clinicians, and at least some version of interdisciplinary approaches and understanding of these disorders, and then talking about modular approaches, and how we might integrate these different strategies to target specific outcomes, I think is important for ultimately being able to engage these types of strategies usefully, in a clinical environment. At the end of the day, we're not necessarily going to get into all of the details of wanting versus liking with each client in our clinical setting, but if we have a deep understanding of how these systems work, it enables us to make good choices about the types of strategies we're using, and then hopefully to choose good measurement outcomes, so we can look at whether or not we're actually impacting what we're trying to impact, which of course is what we always want to include in training, but I think these types of dimensional approaches call for a different type of measurement. So rather than measuring depression broadly, measuring that specific anhedonic target that you're going after.Greg Hajcak: Yeah, I was just going to-- I mean, just to reiterate what Dana said. I mean, if anything, just to take away the idea that you could want something that you don't like, that you could be highly responsive to receiving rewards and not work for it. I mean, these are sort of counterintuitive possibilities that we actually encounter once you start measuring things, in sort of more specific ways.Ryan Beveridge: Great. Thanks, everyone. Another interesting question-- Mary Beth, you touched on this, but there's a question coming in that-- when integrating innovation into existing practice, so how do we make decisions about adapting interventions to match the context, versus adapting the context to match the intervention? Clearly both are sometimes needed, and are there guidelines for making those decisions based on more basic research or treatment research? What are your thoughts on that?Connolly Gibbons: Yeah, it's a great point. I'm not sure I have an easy answer to it. I think, when we work in a community, this is why we work with teams of stakeholders, because I think it does have to go both ways. I think when we're taking these treatments into the community, we have to maintain the interventions that we think are targeting the deficit, that we think is going to be most useful, but we also have to listen to what the clinicians that have tremendous experience have to say. So I think I am open-- and it's one of the reasons we've moved towards this idea of a modular treatment. I think we are open to hearing how they want to deliver the interventions. The modular treatment approach, I think, is right in the middle. It allows us to maintain the target focus that we're interested in, and that we think is going to optimize outcomes, but it also allows us to adapt the intervention to what the clinicians are telling us they want.Ryan Beveridge: Any other thoughts? Dana? Greg?Dana McMakin: She said what I would have said, so [laughter]. Better than I would have said it, so good choice starting with Dr. Connolly.Ryan Beveridge: Great. Let's see here. Let's sort through questions, and if you've seen any that you'd like to take a stab at, go ahead and jump in, panel. One question that has been across multiple audience members is how the RDoC framework sort of fits across these different areas in intervention science, so why-- it's sort of the underlying theme of this webinar series and panel, so how we can use RDoC to conceptualize sort of basic research all the way through dissemination and implementation, which you've all been talking about, but any direct thoughts about that?Greg Hajcak: I'm not sure how complete-- I don't know if I'm answering exactly your question, Ryan, but there've been a number-- for instance, even in the Q and A, you can see a lot of people saying things about "anhedonia" and I think the point is that whatever we've been calling anhedonia, we're not exactly sure what that really is, and there may be anhedonias, and if you really want to understand anhedonia, you have to do a better job of parsing it. So something that "works" for anhedonia in the past-- I mean, is that-- just to use the language we've been using, is that a treatment for wanting? Is it a treatment for liking? Is it a treatment for increasing anticipatory activity in the face of reward, reward-related motivation, the willingness to work, all of the above-- it's probably not a monolithic construct, even, and so I think that's where the RDoC approach could be particularly helpful, to help us clarify what we seem to believe we understand when we say something like anhedonia.Ryan Beveridge: Any other thoughts?Dana McMakin: Well, and not to take us to a different question, but I think it links well with this question that I've seen pop up from both ends, which is, one, is there a temperamental difference that sort of leads to this stable, trait-like anhedonic characteristic, and or when we see anhedonia persisting beyond treatment, does that mean that-- beyond behavior activation treatment, does that mean that the anhedonia's not really part of the depressive symptom profile, and I think it links up a little bit with what Dr. Hajcak is saying, maybe that there are multiple aspects of anhedonia, and that we've just begun to parse this, and RDoC may be able to help us get a better handle on that. But also that it may be that there are aspects of treatment-resistant symptoms that persist, and so it's not that they aren't symptoms, and even if they are temperamental traits, it doesn't mean they can't be changed. Maybe we're just not able to change them yet, or haven't found the right phenotype that matches that particular treatment-resistant population.Ryan Beveridge: Great, thanks Dana. Mary Beth, were you [inaudible]?Connolly Gibbons: I think-- yeah, I think I would add-- I think your question is how does this RDoC focus, for me, how does this improve the delivery of services in the community, and here I think it has great potential. So we have these enormous systems of psychotherapy that have been around for a while, that have a lot of interventions within packages, but I think it's this focus on understanding the specific deficits that we're targeting, and the mechanisms of change, that are actually operational in the treatments, that are going to help us focus these treatments, personalize them to individual patients, and even the existing psychotherapies we have, they're not working for everyone. So this idea of moving ahead and personalizing and focusing on specific mechanisms I think is the answer to how we're going to improve outcomes today, and hopefully as we develop the novel treatments, how we're going to improve outcomes in the future.Ryan Beveridge: Great points. Thanks. We have a question about funding. So we know that funding agencies like to see multiple levels of analysis from an RDoC perspective, in addition to self-report. So someone was wondering how do you suggest that we include behavioral tasks to measure reward responsiveness in the intervention studies taking place in the community, so it's feasible and doesn't seem like sort of an afterthought. Dana, or Mary Beth, any comments there?Connolly Gibbons: Not necessarily a behavioral task, but we're using the effort, which is a computerized task, so it goes beyond the self-report, and we've found that it's feasible in the community setting. We bring in a laptop into the community, and it's a measure that the patients actually like completing. Again, it brings up this idea of how motivated they are for reward, and it gives us a measure that's beyond their own self-report, so I think measurements like that can be used, but we're just starting to pilot those, so hopefully we'll have more information about that in the future.Ryan Beveridge: Great. Dana?Dana McMakin: Yeah, and I think the more that-- in Dr. Hajcak's talk, he talked about the lack of coherence across certain measures, so I think the more of that type of work that we do, the more we can get a handle on maybe there are, for example, self-report measures, or subscales of self-report measures that get us closer to some of these targets and concepts that can be produced by really looking at where the type coherences are and where they are not, and be more specific about what we're measuring, even in a self-report sense. And then in terms of behavioral and neural outcomes, I agree that that's a more challenging task, especially within the context of community work, and I'm not sure I have a great answer for that. I really like Mary Beth's response, and that there are some behavioral tasks that are relatively straightforward that I think we can use, but they are not ample at this point. But certainly monetary reward tasks. There are behavioral components to a lot of those tasks that you could potentially utilize in a larger setting.Ryan Beveridge: Okay, thanks. Thanks, Dana. A follow-up measurement question actually has been submitted. I'm wondering, Greg, if you have thoughts. The question is, are the balloon analogue risk tasks, the Iowa gambling task, and similar tasks, appropriate or sensitive for assessing reward sensitivity as they're impacted by mood or anxiety disorders?Greg Hajcak: Yeah, it's a good question. I saw that one pop up, too. I mean, one of the challenging things about, for instance, at least most versions of the balloon analogue risk task are that events are highly infrequent, so the balloon explodes once in a while, but most of the time it doesn't, and so things like event frequency are probably important drivers of most neural measures. There are some variants of the balloon analogue risk task that deal with it. My impression of the Iowa gambling task is that it's more a measure of reward magnitudes, or magnitude sensitivity. For those who are interested, I would suggest-- there was a group that was convened to kind of come up with suggestions for tasks to measure distinct reward constructs through the RDoC initiative, and I think if you Google search RDoC reward, positive valence system, there's a whole report there. Maybe we could make that link a little bit more prominent or something, but a group of us kind of made suggestions for specific tasks to use to assess various subcomponents of the positive valance system, so we could maybe point people to that, or something.Ryan Beveridge: Great. Thanks, Greg. So now let's switch-- this is why this panel is so valuable, because we can switch back between levels, so we'll go to a more macro level. How do you see the information being implemented at a policy level? So state or federal governments. So how can we use this information about reward sensitivity for patients living in communities that have severe, persistent mental illnesses, but are not pharmacologically compliant, those sorts of questions. You start-- anyone want to talk about that?Connolly Gibbons: My experience in the community mental health system in Philadelphia is that they're extremely interested in evidence-based psychotherapy, so I think they were already putting a lot of policy in place to bring evidence-based psychotherapies into the community setting, so I would say that that's already moving along. I think the more we publish on this research, and validate these mechanisms, the more the communities are going to be interested in these treatments.Ryan Beveridge: Great, thanks. Any other thoughts? Okay. Dana, I'm seeing a question that maybe you can comment on. Basically, does the type of behavior matter? So how does the type of behavior affect behavioral activation success in relation to the steps in the flow chart? For example, some behaviors might not lead to as deep levels of pleasure or memories as others.Dana McMakin: Yeah, I think that's a great question, and I don't think we have a lot of data on this point, and so it's been-- this'll be a more anecdotal response, based on my own experience working with-- I particularly work with adolescents, and this is a really critical issue with adolescents, and I think it highlights it really well, because if you think about the adolescent brain, and adolescent behavior, there's a very, very large focus on social aspects of life, and social-- they call it-- I think Eric Nelson's theory is social reorientation, but basically, adolescents are really interested in social status in many ways, and so if you choose activities that are maybe standard for adults, you may really miss the mark on what's rewarding for, for example, a teenager with depression, and I suspect there are also just individual differences across people, as well. So I think it's a really good point, and I think for the most part, at least what we try to do is really connect the activities that we're planning with clients or patients with things that they find meaningful in their life. So beyond just the moment, and more in terms of motivational goals and pursuits, and how they self-identify as contributing meaningfully to this world, and that does, anecdotally, tend to get us better leverage, but I don't think there are great studies on exactly which types of behaviors would be best to choose. It's a great question.Ryan Beveridge: Okay, thanks. Any other thoughts from the panel for that question? Okay. Mary Beth, I'm thinking about you with this one, but anyone can chime in. You talked a lot about the importance of engaging clinicians in this type of work, and someone has asked what kinds of feedback loops exist, or could be created, whereby clinicians can inform both basic research - that can be a difficult connection - or intervention development? And Dana and Greg, if you want to think about that as well.Connolly Gibbons: Well, I think the partnership is the vehicle for that. So for 15 years, starting with a NIMH IP risk grant, we brought together a group of stakeholders, and our stakeholders-- we have a group on an executive committee that includes our researchers, it includes our experts in the individual treatments we're trying to look at, it includes clinicians and consumers in the community, as well as the administrators, and the dialogue goes both ways. And so we'll bring from the research literature the interventions that we think are demonstrating the most success, that we think would be useful for them, and they'll tell us what they think, and what they're looking for. So, for instance, we have a program of research on looking at feedback interventions in the community, and I think a lot of our motivation to look at that came from our community partner, who was very interested in these kind of systems, that could be very efficient and could improve outcomes with less cost. So I think it's this collaborative team that is going to make sure that interventions [inaudible] also important to the community clinicians.Ryan Beveridge: Thanks, Mary Beth. Dana or Greg, any thoughts on feedback loops for your work? [laughter] It's hard.Dana McMakin: I mean, yeah, it's really-- it's really challenging. I mean, so I'm working-- anecdotal, again. I'm working both in an academic institution and in a hospital setting, and I'm constantly reminded of the challenges of really doing some of these things within the settings where we're trying to implement them, and I think a great example is within the division where I'm working, within the hospital, there's a big push for group-level treatments, because it's an easier way to bill reliably, that if you have an hour for group treatment, and you have multiple patients who are scheduled to show up, then a no-show or two doesn't really affect your overall practice for the day. So I think it's things like that that you don't see from the academic side, that I think it is so critical to have this constant crosstalk and back-and-forth in order to really deliver something, and bring something to the table that will work in the environment, and I do think the environment varies across location as well, so.Ryan Beveridge: Great. Thanks, Dana. Question maybe for Greg, or whoever feels up for it, but mental illness, someone comments, the observable behaviors are sometimes the last marker to be seen, so the brain changes may have been happening for many years prior, so how do we become more predictive about changes in the reward system of the brain before we see it reach the observable behavior level?Greg Hajcak: Yeah, I mean, I think that's a really good question. I saw that one, and, I mean, most of our work is on identification and prediction, so, I mean, that's exactly what we're trying to do, and, I mean, maybe to tie in with the last question, I mean, what we're really hoping to do soon is to connect with schools and so the question is how could you actually get these sort of measures in large scales, and in a cost-effective way, and I think it's actually doable, and so I mean, I think the person's question is exactly right. I mean, these reward-related deficits seem to be evident prior to the onset of depression, so they're giving us unique information about someone's kind of risk status, and so I think what we really need to do is to start thinking about, is it possible to conceptualize reward-related neural measures as something that we should be assessing in large scale, and I think it's an interesting, kind of exciting possibility that the answer is yes, and it's feasible, and cost-effective, and all that kind of thing. I think that another example, I guess, of this is, and this gets at someone's question-- someone asked about pregnancy, and I think that's an incredibly important time, because women-- we know that most depressive episodes, for instance, are preceded by a stressor, and we know that pregnancy and giving birth is an incredible stressor, and that one in six women will develop depression after giving birth. And I think it's a particularly pernicious form of depression, because it's happening at a time when you're supposed to feel very happy and excited, and I think that contrast is particularly potentially hard. And so I do think things like behavioral activation and whatnot, just to answer someone's question, is certainly useful. Increasing social support in and around the postpartum period is important, but just to give an example, we've partnered with an OB-GYN clinic in Tallahassee, the North Florida Women's Care Center, and we have an EEG lab in their OB-GYN clinic, and we're collecting reward-related neural measures from pregnant women, and then we're following them, or trying to validate these measures, as predictors of postpartum depression. So in addition to self-report scale, so we're trying to see can we keep producing data to suggest that these things are important and cost-effective to get.Ryan Beveridge: Right. Thanks, Greg. Other thoughts? Okay. In reference to a point Dr. McMakin made, a good point on psychotherapy protocols and reward sensitivity, is there literature on combined pharmacological and psychotherapeutical treatments specifically for anhedonia, and what could be alternatives for better measurements of anhedonia in comparison for current or self-report questionnaires?Dana McMakin: Yeah, so, I'll answer this at two levels, because I've seen a lot of medication questions coming up, pharmacotherapy types of questions, and so I just want to kind of clarify that that's-- since that's not my area of expertise or training, I've sort of shied away from talking a lot about that. I provided that one overview slide. So I know that there are, though, pharmaceutical development trials in progress, and preclinical trials, trying to look at whether or not it's possible to augment existing pharmacotherapy with more dopaminergically targeted interventions, but that's something I can't speak to too much more than that, as it's not my expertise, unfortunately. I can say that-- this is the second part of my answer to that question. In one of the studies that I presented as being predictive of outcome when you look at anhedonia at baseline, it was in the TORDIA treatment-resistant depression trial, and what we were looking at was whether or not baseline symptoms of anhedonia, or any other symptom dimension, predicted outcomes to that trial. And that trial was with treatment-resistant adolescents who were engaged in CBT plus or minus SSRI treatment, and at least in that trial, what we found was that anhedonic symptoms at baseline predicted a poor outcome to CBT plus or minus those pharmacotherapy outcomes, and it didn't really matter, to my recollection, what arm they were in. And that was sort of confusing for us, because we thought that behavior activation should improve symptoms in kids who are coming in with higher anhedonic symptoms. So it's possible that the BA, in that protocol, just wasn't a big enough dose. It wasn't frequently endorsed by clinicians as being used for more than one or two sessions, so it could be a dosing issue, or it could be, as I sort of alluded to in my talk, that once you're at a certain level of anhedonic symptoms, maybe the existing treatments that we have just aren't enough to improve those outcomes, and so I think it's a really important area of science, and hopefully we'll make progress on that.Ryan Beveridge: Great. Thanks, Dana. Looks like we're about out of time. Maybe one last question that's an RDoC-related question. Is there a push or need to develop common cognitive, behavioral, or imaging assays to tap into different processes in reward processing, and generalize or compare the finding transdiagnostically? Does it take us away from providing personalized treatments? We talked about that a little bit, but any thoughts on that?Greg Hajcak: My two cents is it's exactly what we would need. I think it's a great question. I think one of the problems out there is that my lab uses the doors task, another lab uses a very similar task, and we're all doing one or two tasks that are kind of related to one another using different measures, and I think it's a real problem, and what would be better is to have kind of, as the question suggests, kind of a standard battery, and then we could have the sample sizes that we would really need to ask questions about what's the underlying structure of anhedonia across multiple measures, because I think that to solve these kind of problems, it's really going to require more of a team science approach. I mean, you're going to need n's of thousands, as opposed to hundreds. And then we can personalize medicine [laughter].Ryan Beveridge: Great. It looks like we're right at our ending time, so I want to thank you all for joining, and thank the panel for preparing these talks, and talking with all of us about their areas of expertise. It's not an easy task, to talk translationally across these really disparate kind of areas of our field, but we hope we've started a conversation that will be helpful. So look forward to our next series. This webinar, as well as our first webinar, will be posted online, so you'll be able to find it and the slides there, and we can hopefully see you at our next webinar. Thanks, everyone.[music]More News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJuly 20, 2017Watch on YouTube.[music]Speaker 1: Welcome, everyone. This is the Delaware Project RDoC ABCT Webinar Series, the first inaugural webinar. We're going to be discussing fear and anxiety. We're moving all the way from mechanisms of pathology to implementation. And we're really excited about this webinar series. We really hope that this will accomplish a lot, particularly connecting some very disparate areas of intervention science and inspiring research development, and implementation across areas, as well as creating resources from this dialogue that can be used in future innovation, and generally creating a dialogue that is oriented towards solving big problems by fostering innovation and cross-cutting themes and research. And we feel like we have a great webinar to that end. To start off with, I'd like to talk a little bit about why all of this is so important. Those in the audience probably already know about the global burden of mental illness and neuropsychiatric disorders. This is the World Health Organization data on the DALYs, which is adjusted life years. And as you can see, neuropsychiatric disorders have a huge impact on quality of life and on the global burden of disease. To address this, we need to do a lot. We need to look across areas. We need to identify mechanisms of pathology, treatments that target these mechanisms in an efficient way with precision, and then get these treatments out in the community. This was kind of one of the main aims of the Delaware Project, and that is all about rethinking the way intervention science works.Speaker 1: Traditionally, intervention science was kind of a linear pipeline. We started with basic research, often very good research, that led to intervention development, thanks to translation thinkers, and then into packaged interventions that could be tested in randomized trials. But all too often, this was where intervention science ended, with efficacy trials in the lab. And the reason was pretty simple. Beyond here, there is the real challenges, especially to researchers who are worried about internal validity. But the past decade or so has seen some really innovative and exciting work in effectiveness research, showing that interventions in the community can be effective, and doing from small to large-scale demonstrations of this. So there's great work in that direction, but there's still work to be done. And dissemination implementation has been coming online, especially with the formation of the Dissemination and Implementation Science Special Interest Group at ABCT, SIRC, other groups that are really looking at not only disseminating implementing these interventions but studying the dissemination implementation process. The problem has been that these areas are kind of their own little silos, and the linear pipeline doesn't work to address the problem the way we want it to. Accordingly, the Delaware Project really worked to think about ways to integrate these areas such that they can inform one another in this linear fashion. But also, dissemination implementation can inform basic science, create questions that can be answered in the lab that would be relevant to disseminating and implementing interventions. Likewise, basic science can inform dissemination implementation, especially areas like social psychology and industrial organizational psychology. Dissemination implementation can feedback through intervention development, whereby translational thinkers can incorporate the real-world challenges in dissemination implementation when designing, and revising, and refining interventions.Speaker 1: Efficacy trials can inform basic science as new information is brought to light that highlights questions that need to be answered about the mechanisms of pathology. There are some cautionary paths here. For example, moving directly from efficacy trials to dissemination implementation may create kind of premature hopes about intervention that doesn't fit well in the community and therefore, while not prohibited outright, could create problems. This much more integrative vision is kind of one of the foundational stones for this webinar. Our goal is to think about mechanisms of pathology, how those inform treatment, and then how those inform dissemination implementation. And this webinar will address each of these areas with three different talks. However, there are some common themes as we move through these areas and back through these areas. And our question-and-answer period at the end, we're hoping we're going to get a lot of great ideas and good questions whereby our three experts can talk about the cross area, themes that really move this forward. So we're very excited to have with us Dr. Stewart Shankman from University of Illinois-Chicago. He's going to talk about mechanisms of pathology as related to fear and anxiety, followed by Dr. Alicia Meuret from Southern Methodist University, who is going to talk about how some of that research has translated into her work with interventions addressing the constructs of fear and anxiety, and then Dr. Shannon Stirman, who's going to talk about dissemination and implementation both from a broad perspective and as related to fear and anxiety. Throughout all of this, you'll notice that the theme of fear and anxiety is a cross-diagnostic - and this is consistent with the innovative approach of RDoC - which we feel creates kind of a unifying opportunity for this cross-area dialogue. Without further ado, I'm going to now pass the screen over to Dr. Shankman.Speaker 2: Thanks, Tim. I'm going to share a screen. That was the second. Okay. So thanks for that introduction, Tim. So I'm going to be talking about response to unpredictable threat as a novel and specific target of treatment. So just to kind of do a brief overview of the Research Domain Criteria Project, or RDoC Project, the goal of RDoC is-- it's a research initiative put forth by NIMH with the goal of moving beyond studies of single categorical diagnoses, and to identify trans [inaudible] constructs. And the idea is that you can study these constructs across multiple units of analysis. So the five or now six broad domains of RDoC, [inaudible] things like acute fear and potential threat, positive valence system constructs, things like reward learning and individual differences in [inaudible] [cognitive?] system, things like attentional systems or memory. Social processes are things like attachment and affiliation. And arousal and modulatory system that are things like circadian rhythms and arousal functions. And a sixth domain that's pending is motor system domain. And the idea is that within these six domains, these constructs can be studied across these different unit analysis, so you can study things with a negative valence system construct, which is the main one we're we're going to be talking about today. You can study those constructs at the cellular level, at the circuit level, at the [physiological?] level, and so on and so on, to get a sort of full understanding of the impact that these constructs can have on functioning in psychology. And just to be clear, RDoC is not biological reductionist. Environment very much plays a role in our understanding of these constructs, as does development. So the idea is, in terms of development, that you can study these constructs throughout development and maybe how they might change or when they might come online or go offline and so on.Speaker 2: So the RDoC is a framework that sort of guides, again, a lot of the talks that we're talking about today and a lot of the work that my lab does on the co-occurrence of depression and anxiety. So depression and anxiety cooccur at very high frequency rates. And just to give you an example from the National Comorbidity Survey, the lifetime prevalence in major depression's about 16%, and the lifetime prevalence of any anxiety disorder is about 28 to 30 percent, and the overlap is substantial. So it varies depending on anxiety and depressive disorder, but the comorbidity can range anywhere between 25 to 75 percent. So, again, very high co-occurrence rates of mood and anxiety disorders. So that's what leaves people like me and other folks to try to sort of recognize the importance of trying to study the core mechanisms of these conditions in order to fully understand their co-occurrence. But it's also equally important to study the mechanisms that are more specific to anxiety versus those that might be more related to depression so we can then help identify more specific targets for treatment. And I think this relates to the goal of personalized medicine, which I think a lot of us want to sort of work towards. Because some targeted interventions might be applied to some disorders, but it's likely that most disorders involve multiple mechanisms. And a comprehensive intervention might involve combinations of different targets, or targets that might be more specific to anxiety, or targets more specific to depression that we might need to come up with in order to truly do personalized medicine, really understand the mechanisms that are common versus the ones that are shared. So the main point of my talk is that heightened sensitivity to unpredictable threat, which is an RDoC construct that relates to certain anxiety dimensions but not depression. And I'm also going to make the argument that this RDoC construct of heightened sensitivity to unpredictable threat is not just characteristic of anxiety dimensions but also connotes vulnerability for them as well.Speaker 2: So individuals [with all?] anxiety disorder are highly sensitive to threats. Some individuals with OCD are sensitive to germs. People with social phobia are going to be sensitive to evaluation, perceiving that as threatening. Panic disordered individuals have a heightened response to physiological arousal like heart rate and muscle tension. But more and more recently, researchers are starting to see that it's not just threat in general, but the predictability of threat makes a difference. Specifically that if the threat is unpredictable that might be particularly anxiogenic for individuals. And this distinction between predictable threat versus unpredictable threat is going to grow and grow in the field. So you can think about predictable threat being a situation where you need to mobilize for immediate action, it's kind of this classic fight, flight, or freeze response. And it's akin to the RDoC construct of acute threats. So you're walking through the woods, and then there's a bear, jumps out at you, he's got his teeth going. There's nothing to predict. There's no ambiguity. That's the fear response. That's this predictable threat. Again, there's no uncertainty or unpredictability involved. Unpredictable threat, however, would be if you're walking through the woods and-- "Wait, is there a bear off in the distance? I'm not sure. Does it see me, if it is a bear? Is it coming towards me?" It's unpredictable. The danger is unpredictable. The danger is uncertain, so you need to prepare for a potential negative event. You need to be more hyper-vigilant. And, again, it's akin to this RDoC construct of potential threat. And this distinction between predictable versus unpredictable threat has been shown to have different underlying neurobiology in animal and human studies and also have a different response to pharmacological challenge as well. So in humans, in our lab and in other labs, we examine these two constructs, our predictable/unpredictable threat, using Christian Grillon's NPU task.Speaker 2: So in the NPU task, there's three experimental conditions. A no shock, predictable shock, and unpredictable shock condition. And in all three conditions, a shape appears and the shape disappears. A shape appears and a shape disappears for, say, 90 seconds. And in the no shock condition, people are safe from shock whether the shape is on screen or the shape is off. In the predictable shock condition, people get shocked when the shape is on screen, but not when it's off. So now I'm in danger, now I'm not. Now the shape appears, I'm in danger. Now I'm not. I can predict when the dangers come, that's the predictable condition. In the unpredictable condition, I can get shocked in between the shapes, at the beginning of the shape, maybe right before the shape, not at all. I don't know when the shock is going to come. That's unpredictability. That's our condition that we really think is going to be characterized in those with anxiety disorders. So one of the dependent variables that we get from this task is the EMG startle response by placing two electrodes below the person's eye and measured the strength of their blink response across these different conditions. And the basic task effect in startle looks something like this. So you have sort of a low but some normal startle response in the no-shock condition, whether the shape is on the screen or off but a heightened startle response when the shape is on the screen in a predictable condition, as well as whether the shape is on the screen or off in the unpredictable condition. Now, there's a lot of individual differences in how people react to unpredictable threat. [inaudible] we and other groups have shown that panic disorder but not major depression's associated with an elevated response to unpredictable threat. So across the shape is on the screen, the shape is off the screen, individuals with panic disorder show an elevated startle response compared to individuals without panic disorder. We've also shown that a startle to an unpredictable threat is related to a higher familial rate of panic disorder. So individuals with panic disorder in their families also show a heightened startle response to unpredictable threat.Speaker 2: And, interesting, this finding held over and above whether those individuals had a diagnosis of depression and/or panic disorders. In other words, independent of whether they themselves had panic disorder, if they had a family history of panic disorder they showed elevated startle response to unpredictable threat. So this led us to wonder, "Well, maybe this response to unpredictable threat is a vulnerability factor for at least panic disorder given its association with family history." We also examined whether an unpredictable threat responsivity relates to more than just panic disorder. So in a recent study with my colleague, Luan Phan, and Stephanie Gorka, we examined across multiple anxiety disorders and showed that individuals with social phobias, specific phobia, and PTSD exhibited heightened response to unpredictable threat, but those with major depression and GAD did not. And this sort of got us thinking, "Well, I wonder if response to unpredictable threat characterizes fear disorder versus distress/misery disorder." So there's a large, large literature by Bob Krueger and other folks that differentiate internalizing psychopathologies into those that are characterized by fear, which are things like social phobia and panic disorder and specific phobia, versus distress/misery internalizing disorders which are things like GAD and major depression. And interestingly in this study, we found no group differences on response to predictable threats. So these elevated and startle response was very specific to response of a predictable threat. So, again, we sort of want to return to this question. Is this variable, heightened response to unpredictable threat a concomitant of fear disorders or anxiety disorders maybe in general, or does it reflect vulnerability as well? So in our current RDoC-funded RO1, we divided our samples. It's a family study. We divided our sample into those that had a family history of fear disorders - so if they had panic disorders, specific phobia, or social phobia - and compared those who didn't have a family history of panic disorder and specific phobia or social phobia. And sure enough, we found those with this family history of these fear-based disorders showed a heightened startle response to unpredictable threat compared to those without a family history of fear disorders.If we divide the sample into those that have a family history with distress/misery disorders, with GAD and major depression, we show no group differences. And this held after adjusting to the program's diagnosis. So independent of whether the individual had, themselves, a fear-based disorder, if you had a family history of fear disorder, you had a higher startle response to unpredictable threat compared to those without a family history of a fear disorder. And, again, there were no effects for predictable threat, showing the specificity for unpredictability.Speaker 2: So to summarize, individual differences in the RDoc construct of unpredictable, aka potential threat, is an important mechanism for certain internalizing psychopathology, and maybe it's only important for fear-based disorders and not distress/misery disorders. And our results also suggest that it might just be characteristics of these fear-based disorders but also reflect the vulnerability as well, given its association with family history. So maybe preventive interventions could try and change this target of individual's responsivity to unpredictable threat. So how would this look? So say you're doing a prevention-- intervention trial, so you have your randomized people to either get your intervention versus a control condition. Maybe the target that you're trying to change is a reduced response to unpredictable threat, and that becomes your dependent variable, which ultimately will then, hopefully, lead to a decreased onset or escalation of certain anxiety disorders. Again, thinking of this as almost a mediating variable, the intermediary variable to be the target of intervention. And startle as a measure-- as far as biological measures go, it can be administered relatively easily in clinics as an indicator, maybe early, or a treatment response, or maybe as treatment response in general. So Alicia is, in her talk, going to be talking about how other targets could be used in intervention research. I just want to acknowledge the funding sources for my work, my lab team here at the University of Illinois in Chicago, and for the Chicago Cubs for winning the World Series a few weeks ago. [Next?].Speaker 1: Thank you very much, Stew. We're going to go on now to hear from Alicia Meuret. We really are appreciative of these experts thinking cross-diagnostically and cross-area. And some clear themes are emerging, for example, the importance of threat as a marker of psychopathological mechanisms. And the ways in which basic research can identify those mechanisms help us to understand them in a way that leads to treatment and treatment research. I do want to make one kind of housekeeping note and that is as we go along, we're going to save all questions for the end, but if you have a question in the moment go ahead and type it in. You'll notice at the bottom of the screen, there's a little Q&A icon, and you can click on that, type your question in, and then we'll get to that in the question-and-answer session at the end. Okay. Without further housekeeping, go ahead, Alicia. [silence]Speaker 1: Alicia, we're having trouble with your audio. [silence]Speaker 3: [Should we?] start again? Okay. So in my translation titled translation to intervention targeting threat sensitivity in anxiety and depression, I would like to provide the audience with an example from my research on testing targets of threat sensitivity and how their engagement or change via targeted intervention can influence clinical functioning. Just briefly, I will discuss the principles of target engagement via intervention, what are targets, and how can we test whether their change, in turn, leads to or mediates therapeutic change. When we understand mechanisms of disorders across multiple units of analysis - so genes, molecules, cells, circuits, physiology, behavior - we can test interventions designed to target those mechanisms. I will then provide two examples of mechanicalistic based interventions that are aimed at targeting assumed mediators of threat sensitivity, the first being CO2 as a target in panic disorder and the second being the testing of multiple mediators across several units of analysis in an ongoing pan-diagnostic intervention study in collaboration with my lab and the lab of Michelle Craske at UCLA. So mechanism research in a context of psychotherapy research, or the question of what works and for whom, may have until more recently felt to many like the famous quote by Mark Twain, "Everybody talks about the weather, but nobody does anything about it."Speaker 3: Despite a mounting need for psychological services for individuals suffering from an anxiety disorder, only small number receives, has access to, or can afford therapy. When they do receive treatment, it is rarely evidence-based. However, even in the most empirically supported psychological intervention, CBT, less than half of the sufferers respond favorably. The key for improving efficacy and dissemination in the ideal world would be the identification and manipulation of mediators, biological and psychological markers that drive the disease, the identification of moderators of pre-treatment characteristics which determine the success and failure of a particular intervention, and then, lastly, these should be brief, cost-effective, easy-to-train interventions. However, in the majority of efficacy studies, there is a continued focus on whether an intervention is successful or not, as opposed to whether the intervention indeed successfully changes the underlying dysfunction or target, mediator, which in turn then changes the outcome, which here would be the [inaudible]. So what are suitable targets? Suitable targets have to be scientifically grounded, which means that there should be an established link between the target and the functional and clinical effect. Let's use the example of salt. And this is a simplified example. Lifestyle interventions for hypertension suggest that there is a direct link between sodium, which would be the target, and blood pressure, which would be the clinical outcome. More so, consumption should, therefore, lead to higher blood pressure. So if you eat less salt, you should have lower blood pressure.Speaker 3: To test this assumption, we have to manipulate the target which would be sodium by introducing a low-sodium diet, which then, in turn, should lead to lower blood pressure. So using a mediational model, the intervention, low-salt diet, should lead to a change in the target, so lower levels of sodium, which then, in turn, should lead to lower blood pressure. Low-salt diet could also be influenced-- reduced by-- if this would be reduced then as a partial mediator or as a full mediator that would provide evidence for sodium playing an important role. We could also then assess the specificity of the intervention by including an alternative intervention such as a healthy diet, which should not lead to the reduction in the target if indeed sodium would be specific. And lastly, we could assess the specificity of the mediator by simultaneously testing competing mediators such as weight loss, in this case, a non-specific mediator. And finally, we could also assess the specificity of the targeted mediation. So, in this case, we would expect that people that are particularly high on sodium levels would benefit the most from an intervention targeting sodium levels. So with this model in mind, I will present the design and findings of an intervention that targets a biological index in panic disorder, carbon dioxide. In the context of the RDoC model of negative valance, the respiration is really only one of the indices under the physiological units of analysis. I will describe how research into the negative valence system threat sensitivity at the physiological level leads to the identification of hyperventilation as a potential modifiable mechanism and target for intervention.Speaker 3: This slide shows how reactivity to fear is an aspect of the negative valence system. Within the system, you're targeting panic/fear at a physiological level based on scientific evidence of the rule of hyperventilation in panic disorder. When we breathe normally, our carbon dioxide levels are in a population range of 37 to 45 mm Hg. However, if you breathe in excess to metabolic demands, CO2 decreases below normal levels, and we refer to that to hypocapnia or hyperventilation. Likewise, if you breathe too little, our levels increase in a not normally high range and we refer to that as hypercapnia. Both hypercapnia, as well as hypocapnia, have been tied to panic hyperventilation symptoms such as dizziness, heart racing, shortness of breath, as well as cognitive symptoms such as fear of dying. And these are symptoms that panic patients in particular are very sensitive to. Indeed, both basic and applied research has provided evidence for sustained and acute levels of CO2 in panic and also other phobic disorders. Phobic patients tend to hyperventilate so have particularly low levels of CO2 when confronted with their fearful cues such as blood in blood phobia patient or driving in driving phobia patient. There's evidence that patients during a hyperventilation test have a delayed recovery, so they continue to hyperventilate after a hyperventilation test, whereas people with social phobia or healthy controls do not.Speaker 3: And finally, there is evidence for variation in CO2, so hypercapnia as well as hypocapnia, in preceding the onset of out-of-the-blue panic attacks. CO2 in these studies was associated with respiratory symptoms, chest pain, dyspnea, but also cognitive symptoms such as fear of dying. Thus, if CO2 is indeed an important biomarker in anxiety/panic, interventions aimed at normalizing hyperventilation should prove effective. Capnometry-assisted respiratory or short, CART, was developed to examine systematically the merits and mechanisms of changing hypocapnia in patients with panic disorder. This brief four-week treatment uses portable capnography, which allows the testing and the monitoring of end-tidal CO2 levels along with respiration rate, oxygen, and heart rate, which allows to very systematically assess to what extent patients are indeed able to normalize CO2 level if they are in fact in a hypocapnic range. The daily exercises are comprised of slower but most importantly more shallow breathing. Evidence from five randomized controlled trials in patients with panic disorder but also asthma result in the normalization of CO2 along with significant improvements in clinical symptoms. But it was unclear if the change of this mediator, so CO2, was in fact driving the improvement. To test the specificity of CART in achieving reductions in panic symptoms by means of increasing CO2 levels, we expanded our design to include an alternative intervention cognitive therapy. Whereas we assumed that cognitive therapy would lead toward a reduction of panic symptoms, we would not assume that there would be a change in CO2 levels.Speaker 3: We also tested the specificity of the mediator CO2 in successfully reducing panic symptoms by simultaneously including competing mediators, in this case, misappraisal and perceived control. Using a multimediator analysis, we tested the impact of each mediator over and above the other mediators within the two active conditions. In the individual's randomized CART, CO2 unidirectionally mediated the reductions in panic symptoms severity over and above the competing mediators, perceived control and cognitive misappraisal. In patients assigned to cognitive therapy, cognitive therapy bidirectionally mediated misappraisal and perceived control. However, it did not lead to a normalization of CO2 level. In fact, CO2 remained in a hypocapnic range. However, in some of the patients where CO2 did increase CO2, again, unidirectionally drove the changes in clinical outcome over and above the CO2's specific mediators, even though CO2 was not actually targeted. However, as mentioned earlier in the context of the RDoC model of negative valance, respiration is really only one of several physiological units of analysis under the negative valance system. The goal of our ongoing collaborative study is to examine target engagements in multiple units of analysis of threat, potential harm, and sustained threat using an intervention that is specifically aimed at targeting multiple constructs of the negative valance system, and that should lead to a more global reduction in threat sensitivity. In this ongoing intervention study, individuals with elevated levels of anxiety, depression or stress and low clinical functioning were randomly or are randomly assigned to either an intervention aimed at reducing threat sensitivity called Negative Affect Treatment or NAT, or they are assigned to an intervention aimed at improving reward sensitivity called Positive Affect Treatment or PAT, which is aimed at targeting reward anticipation and motivation, reward consumption, and reward learning. By simultaneously testing multiple possible mediators of threat and reward sensitivity, including the two mediators mentioned today, CO2 and startle magnitude, we hope to identify the most sensitive mediators and moderators of threat and reward sensitivity. I want to thank the NIH for their generous support of this work, my students, post docs, and collaborators.Speaker 1: Thank you very much, Alicia. We're really excited by these developments because it's clear that targeting these mechanisms creates greater precision and, therefore, greater efficacy of interventions. The real challenge, of course, is how do we get them into the hands of community practitioners who can make use of them? That's going to be exactly what Dr. Stirman talks about, so we'll go next to her. Take it away, Shannon.Speaker 4: How's that? Perfect. Okay. So I couldn't resist the title From RDoC to Our Docs. My colleague, Craig Rosen, gave me that, so cue the groan. But I also want to mention that increasingly we're learning, often in the practice settings where we're trying to implement these interventions, they're not PhDs. They're MDs. They're social workers, counselors, often lay health workers in some settings. And that's an important thing to consider when we think about how to implement these interventions. So the reason that implementation science has kind of emerged in the last decade or two is that we started to realize that if we develop an intervention, test it, publish the results in a journal, and even give some conference presentations or workshops, that they're not being implemented in routine care settings at the rate that we'd like to see. And there are a number of factors at play, which we'll go over. But what we're finding is that most newly-developed interventions don't ever make it into routine care. And that for those that do, there's an estimated 17 years from research to practice. Even when mental health systems shift policies and make significant investments in training and in preparing the workforce to develop these interventions, we see significant variations in how often these treatments are being offered, how well they are being delivered and also in the patient-level outcomes that we see. So this has really led to more investment and more research in the area of implementation science so that we can better understand how to bring effective treatment into routine care settings. And there are a number of factors that have been shown through research to influence the success of efforts to implement evidence-based treatments in routine care settings. And these factors exist at multiple levels, and they can also influence one another.Speaker 4: So, for example, policy changes in the outer context, for example, changes in reimbursement policies, can influence whether or not an organization decides to invest in training their workforce in offering the interventions. If it can be reimbursed through insurance, it's more likely to be implemented. So, for example, with that preventive care, it's something that was emphasized in the Affordable Care Act that's been something that more settings have demonstrated some openness to. So I'm going to talk through a little bit of how these different factors at different levels might influence whether or not these interventions that we talked about are successfully integrated into practice after they're developed and tested. One thing to mention is that RDoC was conceived as a research tool, and it really hasn't penetrated the practice world yet. So in some ways, it could amplify some barriers, but other [inaudible] or if they require special equipment, could be a shift in terms of routines, and workflow, and space needs. So I'll illustrate that here in a second, but just looking-- first let's walk through some of these different aspects of influences on implementation success. So I talked a little bit about reimbursement policies, but there are also public perceptions of what effective treatment is, and for psychosocial interventions, what psychotherapy is. So some people still have the notion of therapy being lying on the couch and free-associating while somebody sits behind you, and takes notes, and says very little. But we also have to think, when we're treating anxiety, about some of the perceptions around exposure. So, very recently, in The Atlantic there was an article that was titled The Only Cure for OCD is Expensive, Elusive, and Scary. And you see the picture that was used to illustrate this. So media can also influence and be influenced by public perception of what psychotherapy is. And they can play a role in how open people are to implementing new practices.Speaker 4: At the level of the inner context - so this is within an organization that might implement these treatments - factors like legal support and the support of the legal department and the compliance officer can play a role. So, for example, if the intervention required some form of exposure that would take people out of the office, the legal department might object to that. And that could influence whether and how certain types of exposure were done or not done in that setting. Other considerations include things like the structure of service delivery, space, and staffing availability, as well as workflow. So, for example, if it were important to examine startle response to see whether or not that's an appropriate-- and a particular intervention is appropriate for someone or to see if treatment is working. Decisions would need to be made about how much equipment could be afforded. So that would be maybe more at, possibly, the outer context level but also the inner context, whether the organization can invest in any type of equipment that would be needed. But then there would also be considerations about where it would be stored, if there's a good space to store it and secure it, who would administer the assessment. And decisions about that might depend on whether or not assessment could be reimbursed. If not, it might need to occur during treatment. And then that would mean that there would need to be training for all practitioners on how to use it, as well as coordination on the use of it so that it was available when people needed it, etc. And these all sound like relatively small things. But in the context of a busy and underfunded public mental health setting, they might add up to become somewhat difficult to overcome. So that's something to think about kind of at the early stages, as we're developing assessments and interventions, whether or not there are kind of scalable ways for those things to be rolled out into routine care settings and sort of what the most efficient way of getting the information we need would be.Speaker 4: And then, in regard to treatment, we also have factors related to the therapist that could in some ways lead to openness to some RDoC concepts but also maybe resistance to others. So therapists don't tend to like DSM. They tend not to think that it reflects what they see in practice. And they tend to think a little bit more about what individuals' goals are and sort of a different way of conceptualizing the underlying disorder. So they might be open to the idea that there are some underlying factors that need to be addressed before improvement could be seen. But the nature of those underlying factors that we identify through a program of research that's informed by RDoC might not really fit with the way that they conceptualize treatment. So those are things to think about that would need to be considered in terms of how we train and how we even present the interventions to clinicians and to people who would potentially be delivering them. There is some evidence though-- Melanie Harned and Linda [Demask?], and others have done research on technology-based training and concentration strategies involving learning communities to increase the use of exposure. Because these provide opportunities to see and experience the impact of the intervention and get support as they're learning to deliver it, and then also address perceptions as well as organizational barrier. So there are intervention strategies that are being developed that can address some of these challenges. Regarding the intervention itself, you'll see over in the innovation circle that concepts like relative advantage, compatibility, and the observability of the intervention is also relevant because they're going to influence whether or not people think it's worth it to get trained, whether they continue doing the intervention, whether they perceive that it has advantage over what they're already doing. So establishing was to track outcomes in routine care practice settings can allow those outcomes to be fed back to the treatments of [inaudible] and former assignment of the treatment. And this is what John Wise advocates in the deployment focus model of intervention development. And then also, principles of uses kind of design, which we'll talk about in a few minutes, can be informed by the outcomes that we see in order to make the intervention more efficient. And this sometimes already happens with things like cultural adaptation to existing intervention. But it can also be used to increase engagement and efficiency of treatment.Speaker 4: So I also want to give an example of technology-based assessment and interventions. Because technology can actually facilitate in many ways some of these interventions that we're talking about. It can make exposure more controlled in terms of the amount of time and stimulus required. But it's important to consider factors like cost and the available technology. Over time, wearables might make some aspect of assessment more feasible. And as smartphones become more ubiquitous and they use very little data, they can also be used, potentially, to even administer some of the different paradigms that we might find to be effective. One example of the use of technology is the CALM intervention that Michelle Craske and others work on. And this is an intervention that walks a patient and a non-mental health trained professional through the intervention. So it actually was a nice way to facilitate training and adequate levels of fidelity. And Geoff Curran and colleagues did a study to look at barriers of facilitators and found that the degree to which it was prioritized and the amount of buy-in, as well as factors like space and workforce, somewhat weakened enthusiasm for the intervention. But the fact that it was a low burden and that they got good feedback from patients were positive and things that sort of facilitated the ongoing use of the intervention. In terms of sustainability, one factor that needs to be considered is whether the interventionists can be continued to be paid for in the budgets of the existing-- of the organizations that implement an intervention like this or whether there's a way to integrate it into someone who's already employed into their regular workflow.Speaker 4: So shifting gears a little bit, we've talked about potential barriers and facilitators. And understanding barriers can inform the selection of implementation strategies for interventions that have already been developed, but they can also be used to inform the design of interventions to minimize the challenges associated with getting treatments into routine practice. That way we're less likely to be sitting here in 20 years wondering how to get RDoC-informed interventions into routine practice settings. So user-centered design is a principle that's often used in web and app development and in consumer goods. And there was a recent article in Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice that suggested that it could be useful for developing interventions as well. So one thing to stress is this is a development by committee because you've identified targets, and you have an informed theory on how to produce change, and that has to be one of the guiding factors. But knowing the constraints of the environments into which you ultimately hope that these interventions will be implemented allows you to build something that will work in the intended setting. So bringing stakeholders to the table like the people who will be delivering it, potential patients, administrators within organization, can allow their input to increase the likelihood that interventions will ultimately be transported into treatment settings. And RDoC can facilitate this work by informing the development at the most efficient and precise forms of intervention possible, which can have an impact on things like learnability and memorability that you see up on this chart. But it's also important to think about how the material might need to be presented to the audience like the providers and patients who might be less familiar with the concept. So thinking even about what the psychoeducation would need to look like, and how the rationale would be presented, and finding compelling ways to build that or any [inaudible] intervention can be important to consider.Speaker 4: And then also, when developing an intervention, learning about these potential barriers and facilitators at the outset allows the development of interventions that are more likely to be successfully integrated into the intended setting and reach the intended audience. So using kind of an iterative process as you're developing and piloting the intervention with some of these factors in mind might ultimately increase the success of efforts to get these treatments into routine care. And finally, I want to talk about how implementation science can be integrated into research design. So formative research, like we talked about, getting stakeholder feedback and getting information about outcomes as well as things like feasibility are certainly important. But then also, hybrid research can be important. So hybrid research is sort of a combination of effectiveness and implementation research. And by integrating the two, it can inform and speed the translation of research into practice. So type one focuses primarily on effectiveness and pre-implementation factors. Type two is equal emphasis on both the effectiveness as well as how to implement the intervention. And then type three is maybe when you have a little bit more effectiveness data, so you're focusing on how to implement it. And also getting some measures of effectiveness to make sure it's having the desired impact once it's translated out into the routine care setting. But also, if some of the things that we're talking about or that I talked about with the intervention development aren't feasible, if there just really isn't a way currently to do something that's lean, and efficient, and scalable and it's going to require some changes in terms of the way that the workflow-- changes in the workflow, changes in how assessment is done. Doing some cost analyses to justify those changes in routine care right at the outset can also lead to better buy-in at the organizational level and can also help speed implementation.Speaker 4: Other factors to consider are looking at the impact of different forms of adaptation on effectiveness so that when you're training, you can tell people what absolutely needs to be preserved and what can be changed a little bit if needed. And also strategies to improve implementation and long-term sustainability of the intervention are important to consider at the outset. So even factors when you're doing research-- like if you hire extra staff at a clinic to get your study done, will it survive when the funding ends? Or would it be better to train the existing staff and have a model to backfill if there is turnover in rapidly trained new staff? That might actually help inform effort to ultimately spread the intervention and get it into routine care settings. Because if you rely on an intervention that paid for the study, there's lots of evidence that it won't last, even in that clinic, after the study ends. So with that, I'm going to turn it back over to Tim, and we'll kind of integrate these three talks and, I think, have some discussion.Speaker 1: Thanks very much, Shannon. We're really impressed with work that has gone into preparing these kind of cross-cutting themes and talks, and now is your chance to ask questions either about a specific talk or perhaps more importantly, about these kinds of cross-cutting themes and opportunities. We have some questions that were sent in ahead of time. We're going to start with some of those, and then we have some questions that have popped up and will continue to pop up as we go along. In preface to this, I want to emphasize a couple of things. First of all, the presenters do not necessarily represent NIMH. However, we're thankful to be working very closely with NIMH. Also, if you have specific questions about RDoC and RDoC funding, whether or not your idea, your project will get funded or could get funded by NIMH and how it connects with RDoC, we'd encourage you to go directly to NIMH with those questions, and they're happy to field them. The first question I want to start out with is one that came in ahead of time, and that is about training implications. What are the implications for training on all levels? So that includes community clinicians who are already practicing as well as graduate students, interns, and postdoc students. Shannon, since you've got the screen, I'm wondering if you want to start and field that question.Speaker 4: I think that that's-- and training, I think, is a challenge when you're trying to span all three of these things. But when you're working at sort of in graduate program, people do have the opportunity to start learning both kind of the rationale and the science behind the way these interventions are developed but then also learn about how to make them implementable. So I do think that including training that at least informs people a little bit about all of these things are important. But also, given that a lot of the people that are delivering these interventions are not at that PhD level, thinking about training, and master's programs, and social work programs, I think, is also important. So figuring out ways to kind of increase intradisciplinary exchange and get some of these ideas into master's level programs I think would also be important.Speaker 1: Thanks. Stew, do you have any thoughts on that issue? Training and how mechanisms can be trained or at least understood at all levels?Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I think it's safe to agree with what Shannon was just saying. But it's not just for PhD programs as well. I think for medical programs in medical schools, and maybe residency programs might be a better fit in residencies to be exposed to the understanding of basic mechanisms and how that translates into interventions and then ultimately into dissemination implementation. I think in sort of all aspects of mental health training programs, I think it's important.Speaker 1: Thanks. How about you Alicia? Can you comment on perhaps treating with your interventions - you've certainly trained people - and how that applies across the training spectrum?Speaker 3: Yeah, so very much agree with Shannon and Stew. And, clearly, there are obstacles that have to be overcome. I do believe now it is very important for people to understand the underlying mechanisms of the treatment, and what is really intended to be targeted, and how this can be best targeted. And, of course, in that respect we will have to do a better job to make this more disseminable - less dependable on extensive training - but simplify it and therefore, making it more available to everyone.Speaker 1: Thank you. Okay. We're going to go to another question that was submitted ahead of time and that is, why does the Delaware Project support RDoC? In what ways does thinking about mental illness dimensionally actually help dissemination implementation? The question is, it seems like it would be the other way around. That is, the more readily we can simplify diagnosis the more readily systems of care can manage their needs. And this is actually similar to some other questions that have been submitted about the potential for RDoC as a kind of unifying process, acknowledging that there are some who have other views of RDoC. Stew, do you want to field that question first?Speaker 2: Yeah.Speaker 1: That was a lot.Speaker 2: Yeah. It's a great question. I mean, I think RDoC really is consistent with the goal of the Delaware Project. And while it's true that it might be easier to disseminate a system that's-- really, easier to disseminate a system that people are already used to, i.e., DSM. People are already used to DSM when thinking categorically. And so it's easier to disseminate something that things are used to. But right now, our interventions are-- today we're talking about negative valence and anxiety. For anxiety, they're sort of moderate at best. So just because something's easier to disseminate doesn't mean that's always the best thing for our clients and patients. So ultimately, I think when RDoC-- right now, RDoC is a research initiative, but the next-generation, I guess RDoC 2.0, I think is going to be interested in more of the clinical utility and clinical application of it. And so, indeed, the future-- it's going to be important for clinicians to - I don't know - lack of a better word, get with the times.Speaker 1: Thanks. Alicia, do you have any thoughts on that?Speaker 3: No, I very much agree. And I do believe that it will simplify matters. In fact, intervention research is already moving in this direction. There are unified protocols. There are transdiagnostic protocols. There will be hopefully soon pandiagnostic protocols. It will allow to, rather than focusing on very specific diagnoses that may not exist in the real world, come up with techniques and methods that will apply more broadly.Speaker 1: Thanks. Shannon?Speaker 4: Yeah. I think just one thing to add is that if we find compelling reasons for-- I mean, people want-- when they're trained in therapy and when they're doing treatment they always have a reason for why they do what they're doing. And so if these concepts can be translated in an understandable way out to the people that are ultimately going to be delivering them, I think people are happy to-- if they have an understanding and they can have a sense of why it's important to target this particular thing or why this intervention might be important at this particular time-- we talk about training people in case conceptualization right now because we don't want people to feel lost if they encounter something that they don't quite know how to handle in treatment, especially when they're delivering a new type of intervention. And so it might be a shift in how people conceptualize some of these things that they see. But by helping people understand these concepts, I think people can feel like they have tools and they understand--Speaker 1: Shannon, we've lost your sound.Speaker 4: --why. Oh.Speaker 1: There you go. You're back.Speaker 4: Okay. So even though there could be a shift in the idea of why and in what they do, I think as long as people feel like they've got that information and they've got some tools, it can actually help them feel more prepared in some ways to address some of the things that they're seeing. It's just a matter of figuring out how to handle that shift in terms of the way that people think about what they're doing when they're treating people which, depending on what we find as promising interventions, may or may not be a significant shift.Speaker 1: Thanks. I think that makes a lot of sense. The next question is related. It's actually the first one that popped up in our Q&A this session, and that's how might treatment effects feed back and inform psychopathology research and other basic research. Stew, do you want to field that one?Speaker 2: Say that again. You broke up for a second there.Speaker 1: It's how treatment effects-- so what we're learning from randomized trials and mediator/moderator research like Alicia is doing, can that inform basic research on psychopathology and mechanisms? And if so, how?Speaker 2: Gotcha. Yeah. Say for example a treatment study shows that a particular target or particular-- maybe target's not the right word. But say a particular outcome variable changes very early during the course of the treatment. And then there's other aspects of the syndrome or of the phenotype that either don't change or change very, very late in the process, then I think trying to understand, which are, maybe, the core aspects of these illnesses then? Because if the intervention is working, maybe things should kind of get better all at the same time. But if there's different components to the illness that are changing at different times, or maybe not changing at all, then we need to understand that a little bit better. Again, getting back and doing some of the basic experimental psychopathology research to try to decompose that syndrome into its different components. Because clearly, again, [inaudible] this actually happens, that if different components in the intervention-- or even different components of the syndrome are changing this as a response to the intervention, then maybe we're dealing with a really heterogeneous syndrome, here.Speaker 1: I think that that's a great answer, and there's some good ideas and innovation in there. Alicia, do you want to comment on the same question? You probably thought about it before.Speaker 3: Well, and I would just add to that, that I would, actually, very strongly encourage practitioners and therapists to, for example, submit case studies or case description. Because we are thinking about a set of mediators that oftentimes do derive from basic research. But it's very much possible that there are many other mediators, risk factors out there that we have not thought about. And the person that is interacting with the client directly, with the patient directly, is in the best position to observe them and share them with the researchers. And one way of doing that is by, for example, publishing these results in a case study. This can be very, very valuable.Speaker 1: I think that makes sense. Shannon, I'm going to give you a chance to respond in a minute if you want to. But there's a question out there that actually is related to what you just said, Alicia. And that is, in your work, specifically, how do you decide on the measurement resolution and timing of the mediator assessment in relation to outcome?Speaker 3: So, I mean, that is a little bit more statistically-based. I mean, we know that-- I mean, ideally, to assess temporal precedence. And so that is the idea of to what extent does an assumed mediator changes the outcome. We would ideally not want to do this only at a pre-post level. But to, in fact, get a better picture, it is very advisable to assess multiple times throughout the treatment. And that can actually also allow an aspect that was mentioned earlier that if we see that some of these targeted mediators change particularly early, they may be the ones that-- and maybe subsequently predict greater outcome, these are the particularly strong mediators that we want to focus on. But preferably for a statistical model of mediation, we have multiple assessment time points. In the study that I was just talking about, we had five assessment time points at every session. And that can, of course, make it sometimes much more difficult, or basically unrealistic, to assess certain mediators such as neural mediators. We can not, of course, expect a lot of-- we can put a person in a scanner multiple times throughout an intervention, and so there are sometimes designs in the application can be more difficult.Speaker 1: Thank you. Shannon, any thoughts going back to that connection between how treatment research can feed back to basic research?Speaker 4: Yeah. I think both providing the outcomes, whether through treatment research or even sort of practice-based research. Feeding back outcomes, as well as information about when the clinician thought they needed to maybe adapt the intervention and why or things that came up that interfered might actually provide some really useful information. For example, if you're learning that some people, just-- their anxiety got so high they couldn't engage in a particular aspect of the treatment. And maybe you start to see that a subset of people-- this is something that either you're learning about by watching the sessions when you're doing fidelity assessments, or the therapist is reporting it. Or maybe even there's something in the assessment that's being provided. Where you can determine that it might start to give you ideas about some individual differences that would need to be explored back before you can figure out how you can intervene. Or it might give you ideas about a different type of intervention that could be used and built into the treatment. When people, for example, have such a high level of anxiety that they can't focus or participate in whatever the particular intervention is, that's trying to be used. So I think that's one way that feedback could actually inform both basic research, as well as the refinement of the intervention itself.Speaker 1: Thank you. I think those are all great ideas and very consistent with the aims of kind of integrating intervention science. We have another question along those lines and very consistent with the Delaware Project goals. How can science-oriented programs begin to implement RDoC measures in training clinics? As a clinic director myself, I'm interested in this question, and clearly, others in the audience are. The question is clarified, specifically kind of what is the low-hanging fruit that we can implement now? Are there measures out there that could be put into training clinics. Stew, do you want to start on that one?Speaker 2: Yeah. Like Shannon was talking about before, I think it boils down to the unit of analysis that you're interested in. So in a training clinic, it's probably not feasible at this point in time to do fMRI scans on people. Maybe at another point in time. And even some biological, psychophysiological measures might not work as well. But there's some really interesting work, for example, done by Chris Patrick, down at Florida State, where he's looking at sort of latent variables of RDoC constructs and finds that wherther you have a biological variable-- but you could have a self-report indicator of that latent biological construct. And maybe you can take this measure, this self-report measure, and implement that in a training clinic. So as far as on the assessment side of things, I think that's useful. The other place where I think RDoC can implement-- so we got an assessment side; RDoC can play a role in a training clinic. But I think also in terms of didactics. The origin of RDoC-- while it's a new initiative, the concept of RDoC has its origins in kind of just basic functional analysis that's been around for 20 or 30 years. Where instead of assessing a person and saying, "Well, here's their DSM category," and, "Let's pull the manual off the shelf," a lot of us said, "Well, what's their functional deficit? Do they have a deficit in how they respond to reward? Do they have a deficit in how they respond to threat?" and then tailoring your intervention based on that. That's kind of the origin of RDoC, and so I think educating people in programs regarding this basis of doing a functional assessment on people is important as well.Speaker 1: Thanks. Alicia, I know you've done training, at least with your interventions, and there are new measures that you're using, especially when you're looking at things like CO2. Can you implement those in training clinics? And if so, what's the best approach?Speaker 3:  So a measure like CO2 is relatively easy to implement. It would take seconds, minutes, to assess CO2. Of course, it is a device that is expensive, and a portable capnometer, which is a medical device, currently runs at probably $2,500. And so that is a reality, but I do believe very strongly that-- also, and I want to add to that what Stew said, "Mediators are not just-- or units of analysis not just neuro ones, or physiological ones, or [cellular?] ones. I mean they are-- it is self-report. And originally it did-- I mean, we saw-- where we probably have to end up [culling?] most information. And so even just assessing symptoms on a weekly base using maybe some more diagnostic independent assessment tools, some [inaudible] tools, is extremely valuable at tracking them and observing that if a person is stagnating in their-- based on the assessment on their reward sensitivity measures or threat sensitivity measures, to be able to note that and intervene and see, "Well, can we shift gears and use a different maybe treatment technique at that point?"Speaker 1: Thank you. That's helpful for me as a clinic director and hopefully others as well. Shannon, you can address this if you want to, in the clinic director question, but there's kind of an analogous question that might be useful, and you could field this one. It's what is the thinking now on the best way to train practitioners on newer treatment models or the principles or approaches? For example, inhibitory learning and expectancy violations for panic, what's the best way to get these ideas out in front of the clinicians on the ground?Speaker 4: Well, there's more and more research that suggests that training has to be multi-faceted. So just doing, for example, a workshop is not going to work. And actually, there's evidence that although training that involves ongoing consultation can lead to-- basically, what we seem to be finding is that most anyone can be trained to do these interventions with some sort of a workshop and intensive consultation. But whether or not they then go on to use it really depends-- and training and consultation doesn't seem to be quite enough. But there is some evidence that some form of ongoing consultation where people bring in information about their cases, maybe bring in some treatment materials--Speaker 1: Oh, we lost your audio again, Shannon.Speaker 4: You lose my audio? I'm sorry.Speaker 1: Now you're back.Speaker 4: So I'm going to just hold the phone up to my ear here. So training and consultation that would address sort of barriers at the level of attitudes and perceptions of the intervention as well as organizational challenges seems to be important. And I would add that the information has to be presented in a way that's compelling, and very user-friendly, and usable. So if you're doing a workshop, having lengthy didactics about the theory behind it is less likely to really engage people. Finding ways to break up what people need to know about the theory with experiential exercises and then having some tools that people can use when they go back and try to practice it, like very brief clips of videos, or podcasts, or something that they can refer to quickly before they go in and do an intervention, or help sheets and tip sheets to walk them through what they need to do and why, can be things that make it a little bit easier for people to start integrating these practices into their treatment. And it can also make it a little bit more digestible. It makes the concepts a little more user-friendly, just remembering to eliminate jargon, present things in a simple way. And have it so that people can access the information they need, even between consultations. So that if they need a quick refresher before they go into a session they've got it. So those are some different ways that training can be enhanced and increase the chances of people starting using these interventions.Speaker 1: Thanks. Those are all really great ideas. And I know, because I know your work, that you've seen that in action and are speaking from experience. I want to go now to a question that's actually surfaced a number of different times from the audience and that is, what are the policy implications? Are there ways in which the things that have been discussed can be enhanced? Or the delivery, dissemination, and implementation can be enhanced? Shannon, since you've got the screen, do you want to tackle that question first? I know you've come up against policy in lots of different arenas. Do you have thoughts on how what we've discussed has implications for policy?Speaker 4: Well, I think that at some point there could be enough evidence about the importance of certain forms of assessment, and eventually also the cost benefits of doing some assessment that might not currently be reimbursed, that then could become reimbursable if we can demonstrate that actually getting that information at the outset about who's going to be most appropriate for certain types of treatment, or how to target treatment more efficiently, could lead to changes in the way that assessment is reimbursed. And I think that would be one important policy shift. Especially if the assessment takes more than just a few minutes at the start of a session, yeah. Right now, something like a Quicksoft report could obviously be integrated pretty easily into a therapy session. But if there's a test that would need to be done maybe prior to figuring out what treatment is going to be most beneficial-- we would probably need to do some research and demonstrate that the [up front?] costs would be sort of recouped in terms of treatment efficiency and reduction in likelihood of relapse, etc. But that's one thing that comes to mind. There are also some healthcare systems that implement policies around the types of interventions that need to be implemented. And those are largely based on things like evidence of the effectiveness, and the precedent need, and relative priority within those different systems. So I mean, there could be policies around making certain forms of intervention or assessment available within different organizations or different settings. But, again, I think in the case, for example, where they implemented cognitive behavioral therapy throughout the healthcare system, things like that were done after a cost analysis as well as a demonstration project demonstrating cost benefits as well as effectiveness.Speaker 1: [inaudible]. Thanks. Stew, it sounds like you got thoughts on this too?Speaker 2: Yeah. I think another policy issue that we were talking about before has to do with training. The oversight agencies that accredit-- whether it's psychology program, or social work programs, and so on, sometimes there's a [inaudible] some of them, a lack of emphasis or maybe a lack of recognition around the importance of science, whether it's science in the basic psychopathology level or any of these assets we're talking about, dissemination science, interventions, and so on. So in terms of the policies of the accreditation bodies, I think it's really important for things like the Delaware Project and RDoC to try to influence those types of policies as well.Speaker 1: Yeah. And accreditation's a huge issue, especially when it comes to training, and that's one of the core kind of tenets of the Delaware Project. Alicia, do you have thoughts on policy either as it relates to training, dissemination, implementation or RDoC?Speaker 3: Well, I mean, I think what I would only add is that if it can be shown that certain assessments, even though maybe more costly in the beginning, will help to identify who will be benefitting most from a specific treatment, I mean, ultimately this will have a very positive effect on, of course, the outcome of this particular person but also in terms of reducing overall cost and then, in turn, being then less taxing on society.Speaker 1: Thanks. I think that's really important and sheds some key light on this. I'm going to shift gears a little bit and go back to a question that was submitted ahead of time but has come up in lots of settings, not just here but in some [inaudible] I've been to and in private conversations. And they're kind of two twin questions. The first question is, do you think that RDoC is a finished product? And the second one is, does RDoC replace the DSM or other diagnostic categorization systems? Stew, you mentioned us--Speaker 3: Tim, your screen just froze.Speaker 2: I think I heard the question though. The question was, is RDoC a finished product, and will it replace the DSM. I think that's what he said. And it's not a finished product. I mean, I don't speak for it. I don't work for NIMH. But from every reading that I've read about RDoC and every presentation that I've seen from individuals in RDoC unit, RDoC is designed to be kind of a living, breathing nomenclature and really more of, I guess, a guiding to how to understand psychopathology. For example, the RDoC Matrix, which is on the website right now, is not supposed to be the definitive final set of constructs that one is supposed to study or one is supposed to identify. I think at some point there'll be some RDoC constructs that might have a little more [legs?] than others, but I know that NIMH is interested in other constructs that are not just in this RDoC Matrix. And in terms of will it replace the DMS? I don't have a crystal ball. I'm not sure what sort of the future holds. But I think, at least in the foreseeable future, we're going to start to see the influence of taking an RDoCian perspective in clinics. And so instead of people, for example, in clinics talking about, "This person has major depressive disorder," or "this person has panic disorder," I think we'll to see more discussions that, "This person has really heightened response to potential threat," or "This person has a blunted receipt of reward." And using that type of nomenclature I think is going to start to pop its head up in clinical practice.Speaker 1: Thanks. Shannon, you might see some dissemination implementation implications for that question. How does RDoC fit in all of the factors you discussed in your talk, and do you have any thoughts on its relationship to the DSM and how it's being used or might be used by clinicians in the community?Speaker 4: Yeah. I mean, I think we're probably a little ways away from the shift that Stew was talking about in part because-- I mean, the DSM in some ways has made it into a lot of routine care settings only because a diagnosis is required for reimbursement. So I mean, some people do talk about things like depression or PTSD, certainly, people know when people have panic attacks. I think if people start to have a better sense of the underlying mechanisms, what we will see is people maybe starting to talk about, "Okay, this is how I'm going to treat this phenomenon that I see." But I think more often, people, in a lot of practice settings, are really talking about sort of the clinical phenomenon that they see. And sometimes they're talking about things like anger or relationship problems, and not even something related to DSM diagnoses. But if they develop a way of understanding these things that are informed by RDoC, then it could certainly inform the way that they target those things. And so we might see a shift in how people target things like panic or the way that they-- and maybe even the way they conceptualize. But it's interesting to think about replacing DSM because I think in some practice settings, there's already resistance to DSM that wouldn't make it hard to replace, as long as people find compelling and have a good understanding of what's replacing it and how it can actually inform their practice.Speaker 1: Thanks. Alicia, I don't know if you want to add anything on the question of RDoC, its role, its kind of expandability, etc.?Speaker 3: Yeah. I mean, again, I very much agree with what Shannon and Stew said, and yes, I think we should be looking at RDoC as a living system. The DSM right now still provides, I think, a wonderful opportunity for communication across different healthcare providers. But I think that RDoC particularly will really help to encourage experts in these different units of analysis to test their hypothesis in a less categorial way, and so I see that as a wonderful opportunity and motivator.Speaker 4: One thing to add is that I think that there is openness to things like unified or transdiagnostic protocols and that people will respond, I think, positively to the idea of, "I'm going to learn kind of suite of interventions and how and where to apply them." So that instead of being wedded to a diagnostic system I can really work to most efficiently target what I see in the patients I have. How people respond to kind of the language of RDoC - I think everyone's [pressed?] into the idea of more transdiagnostic or pandiagnostic type of intervention - I think, is something that in a lot practice settings there would be a lot of receptivity towards.Speaker 1: That's a really good point. There's a lot of options for how we move forward. We really only have time for one more question. So last question is going to be one submitted ahead of time and that is, where the rubber hits the road, what about costs? Does addressing mechanisms and utilizing evidence-based strategies cost more, or does it ultimately reduce cost by making interventions more efficient? Alicia, I know you have some experience with this, in fact, some data at least on your interventions. Do you want to start with this one?Speaker 3:  I mean, I do strongly believe that if we end up being able to target-- or to hit the targets that are most essential in the different pathologic phenomenas the hardest, that this will be the most effective and efficient way of treating disorders. However, it is true that in the example of CART, I mean, it does require a device that is rather costly. To use it as an example, it is on the other hand a very brief treatment. It's only 5 session long, whereas, currently, CBT is approximately 13 sessions. So if you assume that one therapy session would cost $100, and the capnometry device would cost within about $1100, then already, after the full therapies CART would actually be $800 cheaper, because it is only one-third of the length of regular CBT. But again, CART is only a model right now. And it only applies to a very small aspect of the units of analyses within the threat category. To what extent it really transfers to any other ones remains to be seen, but I do think it provides at least model of how we can test it and then determine, ultimately, will this actually reduce cost? And therefore make it, maybe, more dissemable and more attractive.Speaker 1: Thanks. Shannon you've talked about costs already in terms of the model you proposed. Any specific thoughts in response to this question?Speaker 4: Yeah. I think it depends on who incurs the cost. So for example, in a healthcare system-- so for example, like the VA, where it's sort of a more self-contained organization, and they can invest in and buy equipment that they needed, but then they would know that instead of having to provide a dozen sessions they could provide three or five, I think that there could be a good argument made for the cost benefit as well as treatment efficiency. Because when you think about the modal number of therapy sessions that people attend as one, if we can convince people to come and stay for three or five sessions as opposed to-- especially when they have long drives and things to get to this type of intervention, obviously efficiency is going to be a good sell. When it's an organization that relies on reimbursement, and they have to make the investment in that piece of equipment, and they're not necessarily going to be reimbursed for it, I think it would be a matter of figuring out whether or not there is a way to make that cost back up in some way because they wouldn't necessarily be seeing-- they wouldn't be seeing the benefits in the same way that a more closed healthcare system would. However, there could be other benefits and ultimately-- for example, if they can get more people to stay for three to five sessions, and if they see less dropouts, then ultimately they might be able to bill more, and eventually, they would be able to make up those costs.Speaker 1: Thanks. Stew, any thoughts on the cost question as it comes to--?Speaker 2:  I think Alicia and Shannon really sort of answered it well. And just one sort of small thing to add that whether it's at the agency level or even a macro cost level if we're thinking insurance companies or third-party providers to think not just about the short-term costs but about the long-term costs, I think those are [crosstalk] different things. So while it might be an investment on the front end in terms of the-- forgetting about the cost to patients - just dollared cost, I'm talking about - that in the long run things might be considerably cheaper. I think balancing those two, sort of short-term cost versus long-term cost.Speaker 1: Thank you. So we are unfortunately out of time. We have a lot of great questions still, but won't be able to address them. I do, in conclusion, want to thank our presenter's Stew Shankman, Alicia Meuret, and Shannon Stirman. Also, thank NMIH and the RDoC unit, specifically, as well as ABCT and the Delaware Project folks. Thank you all for attending. For submitting great questions. This will be posted online, so check back on the website. And this is a webinar series, so we'll be moving forward with our next webinar hopefully soon. Thanks, everyone.[MUSIC]More News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJuly 24, 2018WatchRead TranscriptMore News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJuly 28, 2016WatchRead TranscriptMore News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuFebruary 22, 2019WatchRead TranscriptFebruary 22, 2019WatchRead TranscriptNovember 30, 2018WatchRead TranscriptNovember 30, 2018WatchRead TranscriptJuly 20, 2017WatchRead TranscriptJune 28, 2017WatchRead TranscriptJune 9, 2017WatchRead TranscriptJune 7, 2017WatchRead TranscriptMay 31, 2017WatchRead TranscriptJanuary 10, 2017"Depression for us as Indian men is not diagnosed because of the trauma we've suffered."WatchRead TranscriptJanuary 10, 2017"The depression became an entity that I was able to identify."WatchRead TranscriptJanuary 10, 2017"It just simply invades every pore of your skin."WatchRead TranscriptJanuary 10, 2017"Something that used to make you happy makes you cry now for no reason."WatchRead TranscriptJanuary 10, 2017"Yo nunca escuchado de un hombre latino teniendo depresión."WatchRead TranscriptJanuary 10, 2017"Being Latino made it harder because there's a silence over things."WatchRead TranscriptJanuary 10, 2017"I lost interest with the kids and doing the things that we used to do... you know, that families do."WatchRead TranscriptJanuary 10, 2017"You lose your dreams, and you lose your hopes."WatchRead TranscriptJanuary 10, 2017"Many days I just didn't want to get out of bed."WatchRead TranscriptJanuary 10, 2017"You think I'm this big, tough fireman. I'm supposed to be able to deal with anything."WatchRead TranscriptJanuary 10, 2017"Because you have to deal with it. It doesn't just go away."WatchRead TranscriptApril 14, 2016WatchRead TranscriptJune 25, 2013Depression can affect anyone, but it hits ethnic groups more heavily because the poor often have less access to quality health care. To offset this imbalance, researchers from the RAND Corporation and UCLA, and community partners from more than two dozen community agencies, compared whether evidence-based quality improvement programs, which include psychotherapies such as cognitive behavioral therapy and antidepressant medications, are better implemented through involvement of the entire community or through clinic-based programs. The findings, which show the former to be the case, are reported in two papers published online by the Journal of General Internal Medicine. Project officer and Associate Director of Dissemination and Implementation Research at the National Institute of Mental Health David Chambers, Ph.D., discusses the significance of these findings.WatchRead TranscriptApril 11, 2013WatchRead TranscriptFebruary 4, 2013Dr. Maura Furey on the search for a fast acting anti-depressant.WatchRead TranscriptMore News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuApril 17, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have developed a high-tech support system that can keep a large mammalian brain from rapidly decomposing in the hours after death, enabling study of certain molecular and cellular functions.Read MoreApril 11, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have identified ketamine-induced brain-related changes that are responsible for maintaining the remission of behaviors related to depression in mice — findings that may help researchers develop interventions that promote lasting remission of depression in humans.Read MoreApril 5, 2019 • Institute UpdateOn April 11-13, 2019, approximately 1,500 scientists from many disciplines will attend the fifth annual Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN)® Initiative Investigators Meeting in Washington, DC. This open meeting provides a forum for discussing scientific developments and potential new directions, and to identify areas for collaboration and research coordination.Read MoreApril 2, 2019 • Institute UpdateVikram Harshad Patel, M.B.B.S., Ph.D., whose research has been funded by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), will receive the John Dirks Canada Gairdner Award for Global Health. This honor recognizes the world’s top scientists and their outstanding achievements in global health research. Dr. Patel will receive the award on October 24, 2019, in Toronto, Canada.Read MoreMarch 26, 2019 • Science UpdateThe recent deaths of two school shooting survivors has brought the topic of suicide into everyday conversations. It’s important to know some facts and to know what to do if you think someone might be at risk for self-harm.Read MoreMarch 19, 2019 • Press ReleaseFDA approval of the postpartum depression treatment brexanolone represents the final phase of a bench-to-bedside journey for this drug — a journey that began in the NIMH Intramural Research Program. NIMH experts are available to provide information on postpartum depression and the importance of, and the science underlying, this new drug.Read MoreMarch 13, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have identified changes in brain connectivity and brain activity during rest and reward anticipation in children with anhedonia, a condition where people lose interest and pleasure in activities they used to enjoy.Read MoreMarch 11, 2019 • Press ReleaseA research team found nearly one-third of youth ages 10 to 12 years screened positive for suicide risk in emergency department settings, including those seeking help for physical concerns only.Read MoreFebruary 20, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have shown that a type of magnetic resonance imaging — called neuromelanin-sensitive MRI (NM-MRI) — is a potential biomarker for psychosis. NM-MRI signal was found to be a marker of dopamine function in people with schizophrenia and an indicator of the severity of psychotic symptoms in people with this mental illness.Read MoreFebruary 6, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have launched an ultra-large virtual docking library expected to grow to more than 1 billion molecules by next year. It will expand by 1000-fold the number of such “make-on-demand” compounds readily available to scientists for chemical biology and drug discovery.Read MoreThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuApril 17, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have developed a high-tech support system that can keep a large mammalian brain from rapidly decomposing in the hours after death, enabling study of certain molecular and cellular functions.Read MoreApril 11, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have identified ketamine-induced brain-related changes that are responsible for maintaining the remission of behaviors related to depression in mice — findings that may help researchers develop interventions that promote lasting remission of depression in humans.Read MoreApril 5, 2019 • Institute UpdateOn April 11-13, 2019, approximately 1,500 scientists from many disciplines will attend the fifth annual Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN)® Initiative Investigators Meeting in Washington, DC. This open meeting provides a forum for discussing scientific developments and potential new directions, and to identify areas for collaboration and research coordination.Read MoreApril 2, 2019 • Institute UpdateVikram Harshad Patel, M.B.B.S., Ph.D., whose research has been funded by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), will receive the John Dirks Canada Gairdner Award for Global Health. This honor recognizes the world’s top scientists and their outstanding achievements in global health research. Dr. Patel will receive the award on October 24, 2019, in Toronto, Canada.Read MoreMarch 26, 2019 • Science UpdateThe recent deaths of two school shooting survivors has brought the topic of suicide into everyday conversations. It’s important to know some facts and to know what to do if you think someone might be at risk for self-harm.Read MoreMarch 19, 2019 • Press ReleaseFDA approval of the postpartum depression treatment brexanolone represents the final phase of a bench-to-bedside journey for this drug — a journey that began in the NIMH Intramural Research Program. NIMH experts are available to provide information on postpartum depression and the importance of, and the science underlying, this new drug.Read MoreMarch 13, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have identified changes in brain connectivity and brain activity during rest and reward anticipation in children with anhedonia, a condition where people lose interest and pleasure in activities they used to enjoy.Read MoreMarch 11, 2019 • Press ReleaseA research team found nearly one-third of youth ages 10 to 12 years screened positive for suicide risk in emergency department settings, including those seeking help for physical concerns only.Read MoreFebruary 20, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have shown that a type of magnetic resonance imaging — called neuromelanin-sensitive MRI (NM-MRI) — is a potential biomarker for psychosis. NM-MRI signal was found to be a marker of dopamine function in people with schizophrenia and an indicator of the severity of psychotic symptoms in people with this mental illness.Read MoreFebruary 6, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have launched an ultra-large virtual docking library expected to grow to more than 1 billion molecules by next year. It will expand by 1000-fold the number of such “make-on-demand” compounds readily available to scientists for chemical biology and drug discovery.Read MoreThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuApril 17, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have developed a high-tech support system that can keep a large mammalian brain from rapidly decomposing in the hours after death, enabling study of certain molecular and cellular functions.Read MoreApril 11, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have identified ketamine-induced brain-related changes that are responsible for maintaining the remission of behaviors related to depression in mice — findings that may help researchers develop interventions that promote lasting remission of depression in humans.Read MoreApril 5, 2019 • Institute UpdateOn April 11-13, 2019, approximately 1,500 scientists from many disciplines will attend the fifth annual Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN)® Initiative Investigators Meeting in Washington, DC. This open meeting provides a forum for discussing scientific developments and potential new directions, and to identify areas for collaboration and research coordination.Read MoreApril 2, 2019 • Institute UpdateVikram Harshad Patel, M.B.B.S., Ph.D., whose research has been funded by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), will receive the John Dirks Canada Gairdner Award for Global Health. This honor recognizes the world’s top scientists and their outstanding achievements in global health research. Dr. Patel will receive the award on October 24, 2019, in Toronto, Canada.Read MoreMarch 26, 2019 • Science UpdateThe recent deaths of two school shooting survivors has brought the topic of suicide into everyday conversations. It’s important to know some facts and to know what to do if you think someone might be at risk for self-harm.Read MoreMarch 19, 2019 • Press ReleaseFDA approval of the postpartum depression treatment brexanolone represents the final phase of a bench-to-bedside journey for this drug — a journey that began in the NIMH Intramural Research Program. NIMH experts are available to provide information on postpartum depression and the importance of, and the science underlying, this new drug.Read MoreMarch 13, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have identified changes in brain connectivity and brain activity during rest and reward anticipation in children with anhedonia, a condition where people lose interest and pleasure in activities they used to enjoy.Read MoreMarch 11, 2019 • Press ReleaseA research team found nearly one-third of youth ages 10 to 12 years screened positive for suicide risk in emergency department settings, including those seeking help for physical concerns only.Read MoreFebruary 20, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have shown that a type of magnetic resonance imaging — called neuromelanin-sensitive MRI (NM-MRI) — is a potential biomarker for psychosis. NM-MRI signal was found to be a marker of dopamine function in people with schizophrenia and an indicator of the severity of psychotic symptoms in people with this mental illness.Read MoreFebruary 6, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have launched an ultra-large virtual docking library expected to grow to more than 1 billion molecules by next year. It will expand by 1000-fold the number of such “make-on-demand” compounds readily available to scientists for chemical biology and drug discovery.Read MoreThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuApril 17, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have developed a high-tech support system that can keep a large mammalian brain from rapidly decomposing in the hours after death, enabling study of certain molecular and cellular functions.Read MoreApril 11, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have identified ketamine-induced brain-related changes that are responsible for maintaining the remission of behaviors related to depression in mice — findings that may help researchers develop interventions that promote lasting remission of depression in humans.Read MoreApril 5, 2019 • Institute UpdateOn April 11-13, 2019, approximately 1,500 scientists from many disciplines will attend the fifth annual Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN)® Initiative Investigators Meeting in Washington, DC. This open meeting provides a forum for discussing scientific developments and potential new directions, and to identify areas for collaboration and research coordination.Read MoreApril 2, 2019 • Institute UpdateVikram Harshad Patel, M.B.B.S., Ph.D., whose research has been funded by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), will receive the John Dirks Canada Gairdner Award for Global Health. This honor recognizes the world’s top scientists and their outstanding achievements in global health research. Dr. Patel will receive the award on October 24, 2019, in Toronto, Canada.Read MoreMarch 26, 2019 • Science UpdateThe recent deaths of two school shooting survivors has brought the topic of suicide into everyday conversations. It’s important to know some facts and to know what to do if you think someone might be at risk for self-harm.Read MoreMarch 19, 2019 • Press ReleaseFDA approval of the postpartum depression treatment brexanolone represents the final phase of a bench-to-bedside journey for this drug — a journey that began in the NIMH Intramural Research Program. NIMH experts are available to provide information on postpartum depression and the importance of, and the science underlying, this new drug.Read MoreMarch 13, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have identified changes in brain connectivity and brain activity during rest and reward anticipation in children with anhedonia, a condition where people lose interest and pleasure in activities they used to enjoy.Read MoreMarch 11, 2019 • Press ReleaseA research team found nearly one-third of youth ages 10 to 12 years screened positive for suicide risk in emergency department settings, including those seeking help for physical concerns only.Read MoreFebruary 20, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have shown that a type of magnetic resonance imaging — called neuromelanin-sensitive MRI (NM-MRI) — is a potential biomarker for psychosis. NM-MRI signal was found to be a marker of dopamine function in people with schizophrenia and an indicator of the severity of psychotic symptoms in people with this mental illness.Read MoreFebruary 6, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have launched an ultra-large virtual docking library expected to grow to more than 1 billion molecules by next year. It will expand by 1000-fold the number of such “make-on-demand” compounds readily available to scientists for chemical biology and drug discovery.Read MoreThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuApril 17, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have developed a high-tech support system that can keep a large mammalian brain from rapidly decomposing in the hours after death, enabling study of certain molecular and cellular functions.Read MoreApril 11, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have identified ketamine-induced brain-related changes that are responsible for maintaining the remission of behaviors related to depression in mice — findings that may help researchers develop interventions that promote lasting remission of depression in humans.Read MoreApril 5, 2019 • Institute UpdateOn April 11-13, 2019, approximately 1,500 scientists from many disciplines will attend the fifth annual Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN)® Initiative Investigators Meeting in Washington, DC. This open meeting provides a forum for discussing scientific developments and potential new directions, and to identify areas for collaboration and research coordination.Read MoreApril 2, 2019 • Institute UpdateVikram Harshad Patel, M.B.B.S., Ph.D., whose research has been funded by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), will receive the John Dirks Canada Gairdner Award for Global Health. This honor recognizes the world’s top scientists and their outstanding achievements in global health research. Dr. Patel will receive the award on October 24, 2019, in Toronto, Canada.Read MoreMarch 26, 2019 • Science UpdateThe recent deaths of two school shooting survivors has brought the topic of suicide into everyday conversations. It’s important to know some facts and to know what to do if you think someone might be at risk for self-harm.Read MoreMarch 19, 2019 • Press ReleaseFDA approval of the postpartum depression treatment brexanolone represents the final phase of a bench-to-bedside journey for this drug — a journey that began in the NIMH Intramural Research Program. NIMH experts are available to provide information on postpartum depression and the importance of, and the science underlying, this new drug.Read MoreMarch 13, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have identified changes in brain connectivity and brain activity during rest and reward anticipation in children with anhedonia, a condition where people lose interest and pleasure in activities they used to enjoy.Read MoreMarch 11, 2019 • Press ReleaseA research team found nearly one-third of youth ages 10 to 12 years screened positive for suicide risk in emergency department settings, including those seeking help for physical concerns only.Read MoreFebruary 20, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have shown that a type of magnetic resonance imaging — called neuromelanin-sensitive MRI (NM-MRI) — is a potential biomarker for psychosis. NM-MRI signal was found to be a marker of dopamine function in people with schizophrenia and an indicator of the severity of psychotic symptoms in people with this mental illness.Read MoreFebruary 6, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have launched an ultra-large virtual docking library expected to grow to more than 1 billion molecules by next year. It will expand by 1000-fold the number of such “make-on-demand” compounds readily available to scientists for chemical biology and drug discovery.Read MoreThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuApril 17, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have developed a high-tech support system that can keep a large mammalian brain from rapidly decomposing in the hours after death, enabling study of certain molecular and cellular functions.Read MoreApril 11, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have identified ketamine-induced brain-related changes that are responsible for maintaining the remission of behaviors related to depression in mice — findings that may help researchers develop interventions that promote lasting remission of depression in humans.Read MoreApril 5, 2019 • Institute UpdateOn April 11-13, 2019, approximately 1,500 scientists from many disciplines will attend the fifth annual Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN)® Initiative Investigators Meeting in Washington, DC. This open meeting provides a forum for discussing scientific developments and potential new directions, and to identify areas for collaboration and research coordination.Read MoreApril 2, 2019 • Institute UpdateVikram Harshad Patel, M.B.B.S., Ph.D., whose research has been funded by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), will receive the John Dirks Canada Gairdner Award for Global Health. This honor recognizes the world’s top scientists and their outstanding achievements in global health research. Dr. Patel will receive the award on October 24, 2019, in Toronto, Canada.Read MoreMarch 26, 2019 • Science UpdateThe recent deaths of two school shooting survivors has brought the topic of suicide into everyday conversations. It’s important to know some facts and to know what to do if you think someone might be at risk for self-harm.Read MoreMarch 19, 2019 • Press ReleaseFDA approval of the postpartum depression treatment brexanolone represents the final phase of a bench-to-bedside journey for this drug — a journey that began in the NIMH Intramural Research Program. NIMH experts are available to provide information on postpartum depression and the importance of, and the science underlying, this new drug.Read MoreMarch 13, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have identified changes in brain connectivity and brain activity during rest and reward anticipation in children with anhedonia, a condition where people lose interest and pleasure in activities they used to enjoy.Read MoreMarch 11, 2019 • Press ReleaseA research team found nearly one-third of youth ages 10 to 12 years screened positive for suicide risk in emergency department settings, including those seeking help for physical concerns only.Read MoreFebruary 20, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have shown that a type of magnetic resonance imaging — called neuromelanin-sensitive MRI (NM-MRI) — is a potential biomarker for psychosis. NM-MRI signal was found to be a marker of dopamine function in people with schizophrenia and an indicator of the severity of psychotic symptoms in people with this mental illness.Read MoreFebruary 6, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have launched an ultra-large virtual docking library expected to grow to more than 1 billion molecules by next year. It will expand by 1000-fold the number of such “make-on-demand” compounds readily available to scientists for chemical biology and drug discovery.Read MoreThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuApril 17, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have developed a high-tech support system that can keep a large mammalian brain from rapidly decomposing in the hours after death, enabling study of certain molecular and cellular functions.Read MoreApril 11, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have identified ketamine-induced brain-related changes that are responsible for maintaining the remission of behaviors related to depression in mice — findings that may help researchers develop interventions that promote lasting remission of depression in humans.Read MoreApril 5, 2019 • Institute UpdateOn April 11-13, 2019, approximately 1,500 scientists from many disciplines will attend the fifth annual Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN)® Initiative Investigators Meeting in Washington, DC. This open meeting provides a forum for discussing scientific developments and potential new directions, and to identify areas for collaboration and research coordination.Read MoreApril 2, 2019 • Institute UpdateVikram Harshad Patel, M.B.B.S., Ph.D., whose research has been funded by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), will receive the John Dirks Canada Gairdner Award for Global Health. This honor recognizes the world’s top scientists and their outstanding achievements in global health research. Dr. Patel will receive the award on October 24, 2019, in Toronto, Canada.Read MoreMarch 26, 2019 • Science UpdateThe recent deaths of two school shooting survivors has brought the topic of suicide into everyday conversations. It’s important to know some facts and to know what to do if you think someone might be at risk for self-harm.Read MoreMarch 19, 2019 • Press ReleaseFDA approval of the postpartum depression treatment brexanolone represents the final phase of a bench-to-bedside journey for this drug — a journey that began in the NIMH Intramural Research Program. NIMH experts are available to provide information on postpartum depression and the importance of, and the science underlying, this new drug.Read MoreMarch 13, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have identified changes in brain connectivity and brain activity during rest and reward anticipation in children with anhedonia, a condition where people lose interest and pleasure in activities they used to enjoy.Read MoreMarch 11, 2019 • Press ReleaseA research team found nearly one-third of youth ages 10 to 12 years screened positive for suicide risk in emergency department settings, including those seeking help for physical concerns only.Read MoreFebruary 20, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have shown that a type of magnetic resonance imaging — called neuromelanin-sensitive MRI (NM-MRI) — is a potential biomarker for psychosis. NM-MRI signal was found to be a marker of dopamine function in people with schizophrenia and an indicator of the severity of psychotic symptoms in people with this mental illness.Read MoreFebruary 6, 2019 • Press ReleaseResearchers have launched an ultra-large virtual docking library expected to grow to more than 1 billion molecules by next year. It will expand by 1000-fold the number of such “make-on-demand” compounds readily available to scientists for chemical biology and drug discovery.Read MoreThe National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.It’s possible that the page is temporarily unavailable, has been removed or renamed, or no longer exists.Here are some suggestions:Please let us know about the broken link.The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuCompensatory Response Shields Mice from Depression-like Behaviors – NIH-funded StudyApril 17, 2014 • Press ReleaseScientists have traced vulnerability to depression-like behaviors in mice to out-of-balance electrical activity inside neurons of the brain’s reward circuit and experimentally reversed it – but there’s a twist.Instead of suppressing it, researchers funded by the National Institutes of Health boosted runaway neuronal activity even further, eventually triggering a compensatory self-stabilizing response. Once electrical balance was restored, previously susceptible animals were no longer prone to becoming withdrawn, anxious, and listless following socially stressful experiences.“To our surprise, neurons in this circuit harbor their own self-tuning, homeostatic mechanism of natural resilience,” explained Ming-Hu Han, Ph.D., of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York City, a grantee of the NIH’s National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) and leader of the research team.Han and colleagues report on their discovery April 18, 2014 in the journal Science.“As we get to the bottom of a mystery that has perplexed the field for more than a decade, the story takes an unexpected twist that may hold clues to future antidepressants that would act through this counterintuitive resilience mechanism.” said NIMH Director Thomas R. Insel, M.D.Prior to the new study, the researchers had turned resilience to social stress on and off by using pulses of light to manipulate reward circuit neuronal firing rates in genetically engineered mice – optogenetics. But they didn’t know how resilience worked at the cellular level.To find out, they focused on electrical events in reward circuit neurons of mice exposed to a social stressor. Some mice that experience repeated encounters with a dominant animal emerge behaviorally unscathed, while others develop depression-like behaviors.Neurons that secrete the chemical messenger dopamine from a reward circuit hub called the ventral tegmental area (VTA) become abnormally hyperactive in the susceptible mice. This excess activation is known to be triggered by an excitatory electrical current that drives cell firing. Han and colleagues were surprised to discover that this excitatory current was even higher in the stress-resilient mice even though they were spared the runaway dopamine activity and depression-related behaviors. Yet neurons of these resilient mice also showed a simultaneous increase in inhibitory potassium channel currents.This prompted the researchers to hypothesize that in resilient animals the runaway excitatory current triggers the boost in the inhibitory current in a self-balancing mechanism, resulting in normal mood-related behaviors. By this logic, perhaps the susceptible mice just needed a boost in excitatory currents to activate their compensatory currents.To test this, Han’s team repeatedly infused the VTA of susceptible mice, over five days, with a drug known to increase the excitatory current. As hypothesized, the animals showed a profound reversal in behaviors and antidepressant-like effects – they socialized more and their characteristic rodent sweet tooth came back.At the cellular level, this was accompanied by a marked increase in both the excitatory and inhibitory currents, resulting in normalized neuronal activity. The drug the mice received, lamotrigine, is clinically used as a mood stabilizer to treat the depressed phase of bipolar disorder – and the researchers may have discovered its mechanism of action.Han and colleagues also achieved similar results using chronic optogenetic stimulation to drive up the neuronal activity. However, they discovered that the homeostatic mechanism seems to work specifically in the reward circuit – projections of the VTA to the nucleus accumbens – and not in VTA projections to the prefrontal cortex.The abnormally high excitatory current that develops in response to social stress –if driven high enough for a sustained period – triggers its own compensatory adaptation, the inhibitory currents that corrects out-of-balance electrical activity and produces resilience. So at least in the brain’s reward circuit, exaggerating an abnormality, for a time, proved to be the curative secret, say the researchers.“Homeostatic mechanisms finely regulate other critical components of physiology required for survival – blood glucose and oxygen, body temperature, blood pressure,” explained Lois Winsky, Ph.D., chief of the NIMH Molecular, Cellular, and Genomic Neuroscience Research Branch, which funded the study. “Similar mechanisms appear to also maintain excitatory balance in brain cells. This study shows how they may regulate circuits underlying behavior.”Researchers produced antidepressant-like behavioral effects by reversing out-of-balance electrical activity in reward circuit neurons of susceptible mice exposed to social stress. Further increasing an excitatory current (lh potentiation) triggered a compensatory increase in a potassium channel current (K' current) — as did activating the potassium channel (K+ current) using pulses of light in mice with brain circuitry genetically engineered to respond to it (optogenetic excessive activation). Source: Ming-Hu Han, Ph.D., Icahn School of Medicine at Mount SinaiEnhancing depression mechanisms in midbrain dopamine neurons achieves homeostatic resilience. Friedman AK, Walsh JJ, Juarez B, Ku SM, Chaudury D, Wan J, Li X, Dietz DM, Vialou VF, Neve RL, Yue A, Han M-H. Science, April 18, 2014.MH092306, MH095425, MH087004, MH096464About the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH): The mission of the NIMH is to transform the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses through basic and clinical research, paving the way for prevention, recovery and cure. For more information, visit the NIMH website.About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit the NIH website.NIH…Turning Discovery Into Health®Jules Asher NIMH Press Office 301-443-4536 NIMHpress@nih.govMore News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuCompensatory Response Shields Mice from Depression-like Behaviors – NIH-funded StudyApril 17, 2014 • Press ReleaseScientists have traced vulnerability to depression-like behaviors in mice to out-of-balance electrical activity inside neurons of the brain’s reward circuit and experimentally reversed it – but there’s a twist.Instead of suppressing it, researchers funded by the National Institutes of Health boosted runaway neuronal activity even further, eventually triggering a compensatory self-stabilizing response. Once electrical balance was restored, previously susceptible animals were no longer prone to becoming withdrawn, anxious, and listless following socially stressful experiences.“To our surprise, neurons in this circuit harbor their own self-tuning, homeostatic mechanism of natural resilience,” explained Ming-Hu Han, Ph.D., of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York City, a grantee of the NIH’s National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) and leader of the research team.Han and colleagues report on their discovery April 18, 2014 in the journal Science.“As we get to the bottom of a mystery that has perplexed the field for more than a decade, the story takes an unexpected twist that may hold clues to future antidepressants that would act through this counterintuitive resilience mechanism.” said NIMH Director Thomas R. Insel, M.D.Prior to the new study, the researchers had turned resilience to social stress on and off by using pulses of light to manipulate reward circuit neuronal firing rates in genetically engineered mice – optogenetics. But they didn’t know how resilience worked at the cellular level.To find out, they focused on electrical events in reward circuit neurons of mice exposed to a social stressor. Some mice that experience repeated encounters with a dominant animal emerge behaviorally unscathed, while others develop depression-like behaviors.Neurons that secrete the chemical messenger dopamine from a reward circuit hub called the ventral tegmental area (VTA) become abnormally hyperactive in the susceptible mice. This excess activation is known to be triggered by an excitatory electrical current that drives cell firing. Han and colleagues were surprised to discover that this excitatory current was even higher in the stress-resilient mice even though they were spared the runaway dopamine activity and depression-related behaviors. Yet neurons of these resilient mice also showed a simultaneous increase in inhibitory potassium channel currents.This prompted the researchers to hypothesize that in resilient animals the runaway excitatory current triggers the boost in the inhibitory current in a self-balancing mechanism, resulting in normal mood-related behaviors. By this logic, perhaps the susceptible mice just needed a boost in excitatory currents to activate their compensatory currents.To test this, Han’s team repeatedly infused the VTA of susceptible mice, over five days, with a drug known to increase the excitatory current. As hypothesized, the animals showed a profound reversal in behaviors and antidepressant-like effects – they socialized more and their characteristic rodent sweet tooth came back.At the cellular level, this was accompanied by a marked increase in both the excitatory and inhibitory currents, resulting in normalized neuronal activity. The drug the mice received, lamotrigine, is clinically used as a mood stabilizer to treat the depressed phase of bipolar disorder – and the researchers may have discovered its mechanism of action.Han and colleagues also achieved similar results using chronic optogenetic stimulation to drive up the neuronal activity. However, they discovered that the homeostatic mechanism seems to work specifically in the reward circuit – projections of the VTA to the nucleus accumbens – and not in VTA projections to the prefrontal cortex.The abnormally high excitatory current that develops in response to social stress –if driven high enough for a sustained period – triggers its own compensatory adaptation, the inhibitory currents that corrects out-of-balance electrical activity and produces resilience. So at least in the brain’s reward circuit, exaggerating an abnormality, for a time, proved to be the curative secret, say the researchers.“Homeostatic mechanisms finely regulate other critical components of physiology required for survival – blood glucose and oxygen, body temperature, blood pressure,” explained Lois Winsky, Ph.D., chief of the NIMH Molecular, Cellular, and Genomic Neuroscience Research Branch, which funded the study. “Similar mechanisms appear to also maintain excitatory balance in brain cells. This study shows how they may regulate circuits underlying behavior.”Researchers produced antidepressant-like behavioral effects by reversing out-of-balance electrical activity in reward circuit neurons of susceptible mice exposed to social stress. Further increasing an excitatory current (lh potentiation) triggered a compensatory increase in a potassium channel current (K' current) — as did activating the potassium channel (K+ current) using pulses of light in mice with brain circuitry genetically engineered to respond to it (optogenetic excessive activation). Source: Ming-Hu Han, Ph.D., Icahn School of Medicine at Mount SinaiEnhancing depression mechanisms in midbrain dopamine neurons achieves homeostatic resilience. Friedman AK, Walsh JJ, Juarez B, Ku SM, Chaudury D, Wan J, Li X, Dietz DM, Vialou VF, Neve RL, Yue A, Han M-H. Science, April 18, 2014.MH092306, MH095425, MH087004, MH096464About the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH): The mission of the NIMH is to transform the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses through basic and clinical research, paving the way for prevention, recovery and cure. For more information, visit the NIMH website.About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit the NIH website.NIH…Turning Discovery Into Health®Jules Asher NIMH Press Office 301-443-4536 NIMHpress@nih.govMore News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuCompensatory Response Shields Mice from Depression-like Behaviors – NIH-funded StudyApril 17, 2014 • Press ReleaseScientists have traced vulnerability to depression-like behaviors in mice to out-of-balance electrical activity inside neurons of the brain’s reward circuit and experimentally reversed it – but there’s a twist.Instead of suppressing it, researchers funded by the National Institutes of Health boosted runaway neuronal activity even further, eventually triggering a compensatory self-stabilizing response. Once electrical balance was restored, previously susceptible animals were no longer prone to becoming withdrawn, anxious, and listless following socially stressful experiences.“To our surprise, neurons in this circuit harbor their own self-tuning, homeostatic mechanism of natural resilience,” explained Ming-Hu Han, Ph.D., of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York City, a grantee of the NIH’s National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) and leader of the research team.Han and colleagues report on their discovery April 18, 2014 in the journal Science.“As we get to the bottom of a mystery that has perplexed the field for more than a decade, the story takes an unexpected twist that may hold clues to future antidepressants that would act through this counterintuitive resilience mechanism.” said NIMH Director Thomas R. Insel, M.D.Prior to the new study, the researchers had turned resilience to social stress on and off by using pulses of light to manipulate reward circuit neuronal firing rates in genetically engineered mice – optogenetics. But they didn’t know how resilience worked at the cellular level.To find out, they focused on electrical events in reward circuit neurons of mice exposed to a social stressor. Some mice that experience repeated encounters with a dominant animal emerge behaviorally unscathed, while others develop depression-like behaviors.Neurons that secrete the chemical messenger dopamine from a reward circuit hub called the ventral tegmental area (VTA) become abnormally hyperactive in the susceptible mice. This excess activation is known to be triggered by an excitatory electrical current that drives cell firing. Han and colleagues were surprised to discover that this excitatory current was even higher in the stress-resilient mice even though they were spared the runaway dopamine activity and depression-related behaviors. Yet neurons of these resilient mice also showed a simultaneous increase in inhibitory potassium channel currents.This prompted the researchers to hypothesize that in resilient animals the runaway excitatory current triggers the boost in the inhibitory current in a self-balancing mechanism, resulting in normal mood-related behaviors. By this logic, perhaps the susceptible mice just needed a boost in excitatory currents to activate their compensatory currents.To test this, Han’s team repeatedly infused the VTA of susceptible mice, over five days, with a drug known to increase the excitatory current. As hypothesized, the animals showed a profound reversal in behaviors and antidepressant-like effects – they socialized more and their characteristic rodent sweet tooth came back.At the cellular level, this was accompanied by a marked increase in both the excitatory and inhibitory currents, resulting in normalized neuronal activity. The drug the mice received, lamotrigine, is clinically used as a mood stabilizer to treat the depressed phase of bipolar disorder – and the researchers may have discovered its mechanism of action.Han and colleagues also achieved similar results using chronic optogenetic stimulation to drive up the neuronal activity. However, they discovered that the homeostatic mechanism seems to work specifically in the reward circuit – projections of the VTA to the nucleus accumbens – and not in VTA projections to the prefrontal cortex.The abnormally high excitatory current that develops in response to social stress –if driven high enough for a sustained period – triggers its own compensatory adaptation, the inhibitory currents that corrects out-of-balance electrical activity and produces resilience. So at least in the brain’s reward circuit, exaggerating an abnormality, for a time, proved to be the curative secret, say the researchers.“Homeostatic mechanisms finely regulate other critical components of physiology required for survival – blood glucose and oxygen, body temperature, blood pressure,” explained Lois Winsky, Ph.D., chief of the NIMH Molecular, Cellular, and Genomic Neuroscience Research Branch, which funded the study. “Similar mechanisms appear to also maintain excitatory balance in brain cells. This study shows how they may regulate circuits underlying behavior.”Researchers produced antidepressant-like behavioral effects by reversing out-of-balance electrical activity in reward circuit neurons of susceptible mice exposed to social stress. Further increasing an excitatory current (lh potentiation) triggered a compensatory increase in a potassium channel current (K' current) — as did activating the potassium channel (K+ current) using pulses of light in mice with brain circuitry genetically engineered to respond to it (optogenetic excessive activation). Source: Ming-Hu Han, Ph.D., Icahn School of Medicine at Mount SinaiEnhancing depression mechanisms in midbrain dopamine neurons achieves homeostatic resilience. Friedman AK, Walsh JJ, Juarez B, Ku SM, Chaudury D, Wan J, Li X, Dietz DM, Vialou VF, Neve RL, Yue A, Han M-H. Science, April 18, 2014.MH092306, MH095425, MH087004, MH096464About the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH): The mission of the NIMH is to transform the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses through basic and clinical research, paving the way for prevention, recovery and cure. For more information, visit the NIMH website.About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit the NIH website.NIH…Turning Discovery Into Health®Jules Asher NIMH Press Office 301-443-4536 NIMHpress@nih.govMore News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJune 10, 2014 • Science UpdateAlthough depression is more common in women, men suffer from depression too. Often, men are reluctant to seek help for their depression and believe their feelings will pass after a couple of days. Getting treatment sooner rather than later is critical to feeling better. Without treatment, depression can lead to suicide and men with depression are more likely to die by suicide than women. Therefore, it is important for men to recognize the signs and symptoms of depression and get help.To learn more about the symptoms, causes, and treatments for depression in men, please join the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) for a Twitter chat during National Men’s Health Week on Tuesday, June 10, 2014, from 2 p.m. to 3 p.m. EST. NIMH expert Matthew Rudorfer, M.D., chief of the Somatic Treatments Program, will be answering your questions related to men and depression during the chat.Please use the hashtag #NIMHchats to follow and participate in the Twitter chat. To ask questions, you must have a Twitter account. If you prefer to simply observe the chat taking place, you may enter #NIMHchats at twubs.com to view the conversation in real-time. An archive of the chat will be posted on NIMH’s website following the event.If you have any questions, please email NIMHpress@nih.gov. See you on Twitter!Setareh Kamali NIMH Press Office 301-443-4536 NIMHpress@nih.govMore News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuMay 5, 2014 • Science UpdatePostpartum depression (PPD) occurs not because of something a mother does or does not do. The postpartum period is a time of major adjustment for new parents. Feelings of worry and unhappiness can also be the “baby blues,” which affects up to 80 percent of mothers. With PPD, feelings of sadness and anxiety can be extreme and might interfere with a woman’s ability to care for herself or her family.Unfortunately, like many other mental illnesses, PPD is under-recognized and under-treated. The Affordable Care Act of 2010 specifically mentions the need “to continue activities on postpartum [conditions]…including research to expand the understanding of the causes of, and treatments for, postpartum conditions."In recognition of National Women’s Health Week, the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) will host a Twitter chat on PPD with the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), on Thursday, May 15, 2014, from 11 a.m. to 12 p.m. EST. During the chat, NIMH expert Peter Schmidt, M.D., chief of the Section on Behavioral Endocrinology, will be on hand to discuss PPD and answer related questions.Please use the hashtag #NIMHchats to follow and participate in the Twitter chat. To ask questions, you must have a Twitter account. If you prefer to simply observe the chat taking place, you may enter #NIMHchats at twubs.com to view the conversation in real-time. An archive of the chat will be posted on NIMH’s website following the event.If you have any questions, please email NIMHpress@nih.gov. See you on Twitter!Setareh Kamali NIMH Press Office 301-443-4536 NIMHpress@nih.govMore News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuReduces Fluctuations in Attention Toward and Away from ThreatJuly 24, 2015 • Science UpdateA computerized attention-control training program significantly reduced combat veterans’ preoccupation with – or avoidance of -- threat and attendant PTSD symptoms. By contrast, another type of computerized training, called attention bias modification – which has proven helpful in treating anxiety disorders – did not reduce PTSD symptoms. NIMH and Israeli researchers conducted parallel trials in which the two treatments were tested in US and Israeli combat veterans.Daniel Pine, M.D., of the NIMH Emotion and Development Branch, Yair Bar-Haim, Ph.D., School of Psychological Sciences, Tel Aviv University, and colleagues, report on their findings July 24, 2015 in the American Journal of Psychiatry.While attention bias modification trains attention either away from or toward threat, attention-control training implicitly teaches participants that threatening stimuli are irrelevant to performing their task.  It requires them to attend equally to threatening and neutral stimuli. The study determined that this reduced symptoms by reducing attention bias variability.  Attention control training balances such moment-to-moment fluctuations in attention bias from threat vigilance to threat avoidance, which correlated with the severity of PTSD symptoms and distinguished PTSD patients from healthy controls and patients with social anxiety or acute stress disorders.Effect of attention training on attention bias variability and PTSD symptoms: randomized controlled trials in Israeli and US combat veterans. Badura-Brack AS, Naim R, Ryan TJ, Levy O, Abend R, Khanna MM, McDermott TJ, Pine WSD, Bar-Haim Y. American Journal of Psychiatry, July 24, 2015. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2015.14121578.Threat-related attention bias variability and posttraumatic stress. Naim R, Abend R, Wald I, Eldar S, Levi O, Fruchter E, Ginat K, Halpern P, Sipos M, Adler AB, Bliese PD, Quartana PJ, Pine DS, Bar-Haim Y. American Journal of Psychiatry, July 24, 2015. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2015.14121579.Clinical Trial ID: NCT015564667, NCT01368302About the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH): The mission of the NIMH is to transform the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses through basic and clinical research, paving the way for prevention, recovery and cure. For more information, visit the NIMH website.About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit the NIH website.NIH…Turning Discovery Into Health®Jules Asher NIMH Press Office 301-443-4536 NIMHpress@nih.govMore News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuNIMH, NICHD, DST launch “Mental Health Across the Lifespan” InitiativeJuly 16, 2015 • Science UpdateA new video about postpartum depression marks the launch of a mental health education collaboration by two NIH Institutes and one of the nation’s largest African-American women’s organizations. The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) and the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) have partnered with Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc. (DST) to create the Mental Health Across the Lifespan Initiative.This initiative seeks to raise awareness about issues affecting women and their families throughout the lifespan, including mental disorders such as postpartum depression, and issues that can impact mental health, including bullying and aging.The effort stresses the importance of recognizing signs of illness and of seeking help and treatment from health care providers. The partners collaboratively identified the initiative’s target areas to provide information to multiple populations served by the organization including youth, older adults, and women of childbearing age. The focus on postpartum depression responds to a provision of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010, which calls for increased support, education and research related to postpartum depression by the federal government.Educational modules—including presentations, guidance documents, and resource materials— have been developed for each of the target areas that will be administered by DST members in the communities they serve. The video, part of the module on postpartum depression, features a former patient and clinical researchers involved in NIMH’s intramural postpartum depression studies.In preparation for the launch, NIMH and NICHD hosted a series of informational webinars with leaders of DST chapters in the United States and abroad. DST also plans to spotlight the initiative at its 52nd National Convention in Houston, Texas, July 23-25. NIMH and NICHD will host an implementation workshop at that meeting to discuss the project and identify best practices for community engagement.During 2015 -2016, all DST chapters will be asked to implement programs using the materials developed by NIMH and NICHD. To further encourage participation, the Delta Research and Education Foundation (DREF), in collaboration with Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc., will award 10 Mental Health Program Grants to Delta chapters that partner with community organizations at the National Convention. These grants will be used to help chapters carry out programs focusing on the issues defined by the initiative.  DST has over 250,000 initiated members and more than 900 chapters worldwide and has been raising awareness about conditions impacting the physical and mental health of women and families for more than a century.To learn more, visit NIMH MHAL.From left: NIMH director Thomas R. Insel, M.D, John Jarman, executive officer of NICHD, and Paulette Walker, Ed. D., national president of Delta Sigma Theta,  signing the Memorandum of Understanding establishing the Mental Health Across the Lifespan Initiative. Source: NIMHAbout the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit the NIH website.NIH…Turning Discovery Into Health®About the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD): The NICHD sponsors research on development, before and after birth; maternal, child, and family health; reproductive biology and population issues; and medical rehabilitation. For more information, visit the NICHD website.About the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH): The mission of the NIMH is to transform the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses through basic and clinical research, paving the way for prevention, recovery and cure. For more information, visit the NIMH website.Jim McElroy NIMH Press Office 301-443-4536 NIMHpress@nih.govMore News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.Menu"Two-system” theory bridges basic/clinical gap, may spur treatment advancesSeptember 9, 2016 • Science UpdateAn “incorrect” assumption that fear and anxiety are mediated in the brain by a single “fear circuit” has stalled progress in developing better treatments for anxiety disorders, argue two leading experts. Designing future research based on a “two-system” framework holds promise for improving treatment outcomes, say Daniel Pine, M.D., a clinical researcher in the NIMH Emotion and Development Branch, and Joseph LeDoux, Ph.D., a basic scientist and NIMH grantee at New York University.Pine, who conducts brain imaging studies of anxiety disorders in youth, and LeDoux, well-known for discovering circuitry underlying threat processing, offer their “conceptual reframing” September 9, 2016 in the American Journal of Psychiatry.Neuroscience advances in understanding how the brain detects and responds to threat have failed to translate into significantly improved treatments because the field has been led astray by a simplistic notion of a “fear system,” contend Pine and LeDoux. For example, hopes that medications that lessen rodents’ stress reactivity might help people feel less fearful or anxious often haven’t borne out.Rather, the authors point to mounting evidence that such subjective feeling states are mediated via different circuitry than defensive behaviors. The former via higher order processing in the cortex – and the latter via the amygdala and related centers, mostly deeper in the brain.For starters, Pine and LeDoux propose more precise use of terminology. Fear and anxiety describe conscious subjective feeling states; defensive reactions refer to rapidly-deployed behaviors or physiological responses. Fear denotes feelings associated with an imminent threat, anxiety feelings associated with an uncertain or more distant source of harm.For example, the amygdala, often colloquially dubbed the brain’s “fear center,” in fact unconsciously detects and responds to imminent threats and contributes to fear only indirectly. States like fear and anxiety instead arise from areas of the cortex associated with higher order thinking processes and language in people, only some of which occur in other animals.“If feelings of fear or anxiety are not products of circuits that control defensive behavior, studies of defensive behavior in animals will be of limited value in finding medications that can relieve feelings of fear and anxiety in people,” observe the authors, who note that making such distinctions will help in the design of more realistic translational studies.Meanwhile, the distinctions may also temper expectations for development of specific-acting anti-anxiety agents. “Existing medications are blunt tools,” note Pine and LeDoux. If the experience of fear and anxiety is rooted in cortical changes in thinking, attention and memory, some “anxiolytic” effects might result from “general emotional blunting” or “impaired cognitive processing,” they add.Improving treatments will require a more exact understanding of how treatments work. With this knowledge and the two-systems perspective, existing treatments might be adapted to work better. Brain imaging biomarkers might help tailor treatments to target circuit dysfunctions of specific patients. For example, anxious patients showing altered activity profiles in cortex circuitry underlying working memory might receive psychotherapies that teach them how to regulate emotion through reappraisal or other thinking strategies.Using Neuroscience to Help Understand Fear and Anxiety: A Two-System Framework. LeDoux JE, Pine DS.Am J Psychiatry. 2016 Sep 9:appiajp201616030353. [Epub ahead of print] PMID: 27609244MH002781See NYU Press ReleaseThere Must be Some Misunderstanding: Researchers Outline Barriers to Treating Fear and AnxietyJules Asher NIMH Press Office 301-443-4536 NIMHpress@nih.govMore News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuJuly 18, 2016 • Science UpdateAn individualized program of follow-up treatment with electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) combined with an antidepressant was effective in preventing relapse in patients 60 years and older who had had a successful initial course of treatment for severe depression. These findings add to evidence of the effectiveness and safety of ECT for depression treatment in this age group, and show, moreover, how ECT can be beneficial as a follow-up treatment to sustain recovery.The Prolonging Remission in Depressed Elderly (PRIDE) study was a multi-center clinical trial aimed at comparing two strategies—one with, and one without ECT—for sustaining the effects of ECT treatment for depression in patients over 60. Effective and safe means of not only treating depression but sustaining recovery in the older population is an important public health need. Older Americans are the most rapidly growing segment of the U.S. population. Depression among older people is linked to disability and poorer health in those with other medical conditions like diabetes, stroke, and heart disease. While effective depression treatments exist, not all patients respond to those most commonly used—antidepressant medications and psychotherapy. There is a particular need for information specific to older patients about effective treatments, and how to prevent relapse after initial treatment.The PRIDE study tested right unilateral ultrabrief ECT, a mode of delivery for ECT designed to minimize cognitive side-effects. In Phase 1 of the study, patients over 60 with depression received three ECT treatments per week combined with the antidepressant medication venlafaxine. Following treatment, of the 240 patients who entered the study, 62 percent met criteria for remission (a reduction to a score of 10 or less on a 24-item standard rating scale for depression, the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale). The mean number of ECT treatments to remission was 7.3 (half of patients who remitted had fewer treatments and half more than 7.3). Patients who had not remitted after 12 treatments, 10 percent of the participants, were considered nonremitters; 28 percent of those entering the trial dropped out before 12 treatments without having remitted.In Phase 2 of the study, patients who had remitted in Phase 1 were randomly assigned to either a combination of venlafaxine and lithium, or venlafaxine with ECT. Participants receiving ECT had four treatments over one month, plus additional ECT as needed while receiving venlafaxine. Standard treatment with ECT involves a fixed schedule of follow-up treatment that may result in either over- or undertreating patients. The PRIDE investigators in the study tailored any follow-up ECT treatment to a patient’s symptom scores, administering ECT according to a set of predetermined symptom thresholds for treatment. After 24 weeks, patients in the ECT plus medication group had significantly lower symptom scores (a difference of 4.2 in mean scores). Of those in the medication only group, 20.3 percent relapsed while 13.1 percent of those in the ECT plus medication group relapsed.Several factors, including the history of ECT use, its portrayal in the media, and concerns about side-effects such as memory loss and disorientation, have contributed to its being used largely as a treatment of last resort. In addition to tracking the impact of treatment on depression, the investigators monitored cognitive function of all patients at each twice-monthly clinic visit. There were no statistically significant differences in scores on a mental status examination that addresses orientation, memory, attention, and the ability to follow verbal and written instructions. Study follow-up continued for six months. The authors also note that remission rates in this study are about twice that observed with antidepressant medications in similar age groups. The relatively rapid effect of ECT—the mean of 7.3 treatments to remission spans about 2.5 weeks—can not only make a difference in quality of life but is potentially important in instances in which a person with depression is contemplating suicide and the need for immediate, effective relief from symptoms is urgent.Concerns about ECT’s effect on cognition and memory have prompted exploration of alternative methods of administering ECT, including the approach used here, right unilateral ultrabrief ECT. Previous research has reported that this method preserves the effectiveness of ECT while reducing side effects. One caveat offered by the authors was that the most severely ill patients would not have been able to participate in the study as participation required written informed consent for the research and the use of ECT. Nonetheless, this study helps fill the gap in research on use of ECT in older age groups for which there has been much less treatment effectiveness research carried out than in younger populations.“The PRIDE study demonstrates that continuing ECT treatment following remission in a manner that is responsive to the needs of individual patients can maintain relief from depression and at the same time, avoid overtreatment,” said Sarah H. Lisanby, M.D., Duke University School of Medicine and senior author (Dr. Lisanby is now director of NIMH’s Division of Translational Research). “For older persons with depression, many of whom do not respond to other treatments, PRIDE offers information in support of ECT as an effective and safe option for both initial and maintenance treatment.”The following centers recruited patients for the PRIDE study: the Icahn School of Medicine at Mt. Sinai, New York; Columbia University/New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York; Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, N.C.; Zucker Hillside Hospital/Northwell Health System, New York; Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn.; University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas; Wake Forest University Medical Center, Winston-Salem, N.C.; Augusta University/Medical College of Georgia, Augusta; and New York Presbyterian/Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York and White Plains.Kellner CH et al, the CORE/PRIDE Work Group. Right Unilateral Ultrabrief Pulse ECT in Geriatric Depression: Phase 1 of the PRIDE Study. Published online July 15, 2016. http://ajp.psychiatryonline.org/doi/10.1176/appi.ajp.2016.15081101Kellner CH et al, the CORE/PRIDE Work Group. A Novel Strategy for Continuation ECT in Geriatric Depression: Phase 2 of the PRIDE Study. Published online July 15, 2016. http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2016.16010118NCT01028508U01MH055495, U01MH081362, U01MH086127, U01MH086130, U01MH86120, U01MH084241, U01MH086122Jim McElroy NIMH Press Office 301-443-4536 NIMHpress@nih.govCharlotte Armstrong NIMH Press Office (301) 443-4536 NIMHpress@nih.govMore News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuNIH-funded team finds rapid-acting, non-addicting agent in mouse studyMay 4, 2016 • Press ReleaseA chemical byproduct, or metabolite, created as the body breaks down ketamine likely holds the secret to its rapid antidepressant action, National Institutes of Health (NIH) scientists and grantees have discovered.  This metabolite singularly reversed depression-like behaviors in mice without triggering any of the anesthetic, dissociative, or addictive side effects associated with ketamine.“This discovery fundamentally changes our understanding of how this rapid antidepressant mechanism works and holds promise for development of more robust and safer treatments,” said Carlos Zarate, M.D. of the NIH’s National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), a study co-author and a pioneer of research using ketamine to treat depression. “By using a team approach, researchers were able to reverse-engineer ketamine’s workings from the clinic to the lab to pinpoint what makes it so unique.”NIMH grantee Todd Gould, M.D., of the University of Maryland School of Medicine, in collaboration with Zarate and other colleagues, report on their findings May 4, 2016 in the journal Nature. The team also included researchers at the NIH’s National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS) and National Institute on Aging (NIA), and the University of North Carolina.“Now that we know that ketamine’s antidepressant actions in mice are due to a metabolite, not ketamine itself, the next steps are to confirm that it works similarly in humans, and determine if it can lead to improved therapeutics for patients,” explained Gould.Clinical trials by Zarate and others have shown that ketamine can lift depression in hours, or even minutes – much faster than the most commonly used antidepressant medications now available, which often require weeks to take effect. Further, the antidepressant effects of a single dose can last for a week or longer. However, despite legitimate medical uses, ketamine also has dissociative, euphoric, and addictive properties, making it a potential drug of abuse and limiting its usefulness as a depression medication.In hopes of finding leads to a more practical treatment, the research team sought to pinpoint the exact mechanism by which ketamine relieves depression. Ketamine belongs to a class of drugs that block cellular receptors for glutamate, the brain’s chief excitatory chemical messenger. Until now, the prevailing view was that ketamine produced its antidepressant effects by blocking N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) glutamate receptors.However, human trials of other NMDA-receptor blockers failed to produce ketamine’s robust and sustained antidepressant effects. So the team explored the effects of ketamine on antidepressant-responsive behaviors in mice. Ketamine harbors two chemical forms that are mirror images of each other, denoted (S)- and (R)-ketamine. The investigators found that while (S)-ketamine is more potent at blocking NMDA receptors, it is less effective in reducing depression-like behaviors than the (R) form.The team then looked at the effects of the metabolites created as the body breaks down (S)- and (R)-ketamine. It was known that ketamine’s antidepressant effects are greater in female mice. NIA researchers Irving Wainer, Ph.D., and Ruin Moaddel, Ph.D. identified a key metabolite (2S,6S;2R,6R)-HNK (hydroxynorketamine) and showed that it is pharmacologically active. The team then discovered that levels of this metabolite were three times higher in female mice, hinting that it might be responsible for the sex difference in the antidepressant-like effect. To find out, the researchers chemically blocked the metabolism of ketamine. This prevented formation of the metabolite, which blocked the drug’s antidepressant-like effects.Like ketamine, this metabolite includes two forms that mirror each other. By testing both forms, they found that one – (2R,6R)-HNK – had antidepressant-like effects similar to ketamine, lasting for at least three days in mice. Notably, unlike ketamine, the compound does not inhibit NMDA receptors. It instead activates, possibly indirectly, another type of glutamate receptor, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid (AMPA). Blocking AMPA receptors prevented the antidepressant-like effects of (2R,6R)-HNK in mice. The experiments confirmed that the rapid antidepressant-like effects require activation of AMPA receptors, not inhibition of NMDA receptors.Ketamine also has effects in mice that mimic its dissociative, euphoric effects in humans and underlie its abuse and addictive potential; however, these effects were not observed with (2R,6R)-HNK. (2R,6R)-HNK did not cause the changes in physical activity, sensory processing, and coordination in mice that occur with ketamine. In an experimental situation where mice were able to self-administer medication, they did so with ketamine but not the (2R,6R)-HNK metabolite, indicating that (2R, 6R)-HNK is not addictive.“Working in collaboration with NIH and academic researchers, NCATS chemists played a critical role in isolating the specific metabolite of ketamine responsible for fighting depression,” said Christopher P. Austin, M.D., NCATS director. “Overall, our collective efforts exemplify how a collaborative, team science approach can help advance the translational process in ways that help get more treatments to more patients more quickly.”“Unraveling the mechanism mediating ketamine’s antidepressant activity is an important step in the process of drug development,” said Richard J. Hodes, M.D., NIA director. “New approaches are critical for the treatment of depression, especially for older adults and for patients who do not respond to current medications.”“Pending confirmation in humans, this line of studies exemplifies the power of mouse translational experiments for teasing out brain mechanisms that hold promise for future treatment breakthroughs,” added NIMH acting director Bruce Cuthbert, Ph.D.,.The researchers are now following up on their discovery with safety and toxicity studies of the metabolite as part of a drug development plan in advance of a NIMH clinical trial in humans for the treatment of depression.A team of NIH intramural scientists and grantees traced ketamine’s rapid antidepressant effects to activation of AMPA receptors by a byproduct of its chemical breakdown called (2R,6R)-HNK (above) – a different mechanism than had been previously assumed.Source: NCATSNMDAR inhibition-independent antidepressant actions of ketamine metabolites. Zanos P, Moaddel R, Morris PJ, Georgiou P, Fischell J, Elmer GI, Alkondon M, Yuan P, Pribut HJ, Singh NS, Dossou KS, Fang Y, Huang XP, Mayo CL, Wainer IW, Albuquerque EX, Thompson SM, Thomas CJ, Zarate CA Jr, Gould TD. Nature. 2016 May 4. doi: 10.1038/nature17998. [Epub ahead of print] PMID:27144355MH099345, MH086828, MH107615Contracts: HHSN-271-2008-025C (NIMH), HHSN-271-2010-000081 (NIA)Fighting Depression: Ketamine Metabolite May Offer Benefits Without the RisksAbout the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH): The mission of the NIMH is to transform the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses through basic and clinical research, paving the way for prevention, recovery and cure. For more information, visit the NIMH website.About the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences: NCATS is a distinctly different entity in the research ecosystem. Rather than targeting a particular disease or fundamental science, NCATS focuses on what is common across diseases and the translational process. The Center emphasizes innovation and deliverables, relying on the power of data and new technologies to develop, demonstrate and disseminate improvements in translational science that bring about tangible improvements in human health. For more information, visit https://ncats.nih.gov.About the National Institute on Aging: The NIA leads the federal government effort conducting and supporting research on aging and the health and well-being of older people. It provides information on age-related cognitive change and neurodegenerative disease specifically at its Alzheimer’s Disease Education and Referral (ADEAR) Center at http://www.nia.nih.gov/Alzheimers. For expanded information on Alzheimer’s care and resources, please visit the federal government’s portal website http://www.alzheimers.gov. Information on health and on aging generally can be found at http://www.nia.nih.gov. To sign up for e-mail alerts about new findings or publications, please visit either NIA website.About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit the NIH website.NIH…Turning Discovery Into Health®Charlotte Armstrong NIMH Press Office (301) 443-4536 NIMHpress@nih.govJules Asher NIMH Press Office 301-443-4536 NIMHpress@nih.govGeoff Spencer NCATS Press Office 301-402-0911 spencerg@mail.nih.govBarbara Cire NIA Communications 301-496-1752 nianews3@mail.nih.govMore News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuFebruary 26, 2016 • Science UpdateThree types of symptoms emerged as powerful predictors of whether a youth with one parent with bipolar disorder will go on to develop the disorder, according to a study of 391 at-risk youth. The findings offer a much more specific roadmap than previously available for assessing risk of bipolar disorder early in at-risk youth, and one that is based on symptoms, not traditional psychiatric diagnoses. The symptoms identified—related to anxiety/depression, affective lability (unstable mood, including irritability), and low-level manic symptoms—also provide insight into what may be a high-risk syndrome or “prodrome” preceding the onset of bipolar spectrum disorder.People with bipolar disorder experience marked, often extreme shifts in mood and energy. The disorder affects an estimated 2.6 percent of Americans. Someone with bipolar disorder experiences periods of depression alternating with periods of mania, a state marked by high energy, overconfidence, and frantic activity. The mood swings can severely disrupt a person’s ability to function normally; as many as 15 percent of those affected die by suicide. Despite this, there are often years-long delays before an accurate diagnosis and appropriate treatment. Research has suggested that a bipolar prodrome might precede the emergence of bipolar disorder by several years; the hope is that identifying the features of the prodrome could help guide an understanding of how the disorder emerges, and enable earlier detection and more timely and effective treatment.Scientists participating in the NIMH-funded Pittsburgh Bipolar Offspring Study (BIOS) recruited children of parents with bipolar disorder and a similar group of 248 youth with no family history of the condition. The BIOS team, at the University of Pittsburgh, followed both groups for an average of eight years, collecting information on symptoms of psychiatric disorders, including depression, anxiety, and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. While previous research had found that most people diagnosed with bipolar disorder recalled having symptoms of psychiatric disorders earlier, in order to determine accurately how preexisting symptoms affect risk for later development of a disorder, it’s necessary to study populations prospectively, or over time, starting years before a disorder emerges. This study looked at a relatively large at-risk population; by the end of the study 44 of the participant youth were diagnosed with bipolar disorder.Previously, the study had reported on categorical predictors of bipolar disorder—the presence or absence of a collection of symptoms on which a diagnosis is based—such as depression and subthreshold manic episodes. Among their findings was that, taking into account only results based on following youth over time, and not recall of past symptoms, only a previous episode of “subthreshold mania or hypomania”—defined on the basis of symptoms, functioning, and duration—predicted later development of bipolar disorder.This more recently reported phase of the study, led by Danella M. Hafeman, M.D., Ph.D., and Boris Birmaher, M.D., took a different approach. This study looked at symptoms in different dimensions of function, without reference to umbrella diagnostic categories, and how these symptoms predicted bipolar spectrum disorder.Levels of several different dimensional symptoms were higher in the high-risk youth when they were first evaluated, including those related to anxiety/depression, inattention/disinhibition, externalizing (disruptive and impulsive behavior), affective lability (unstable mood, including irritability), and low-level manic symptoms (not necessarily part of an episode). Symptom levels in three areas emerged as the strongest predictors of later bipolar disorder: anxiety/depression at baseline (as participants entered the study); affective lability, both at baseline and shortly before a bipolar diagnosis; and low-level manic symptoms shortly before diagnosis. Earlier age at which at which a parent was diagnosed with a mood disorder also increased risk. Youth with all four of those risk factors had a 49 percent chance of developing bipolar, vs. a 2 percent chance for those without them.At the same time, it’s important to note that over half of those with all four of the most powerful risk factors did not develop bipolar disorder by the end of the study.The risk factors identified in this study predicted the onset of bipolar disorder whether or not a young person also had a preexisting categorical diagnosis other than bipolar disorder. In fact, the report points out, once the dimensional risk factors were accounted for, disorders no longer predicted future bipolar disorder.These findings offer an approach to assessing risk on the basis of symptoms without respect to diagnoses. These insights can inform clinical diagnosis, but also provides clues for researchers on the facets of the prodrome. Research suggests that changes are occurring in the brain well before psychiatric disorders like bipolar disorder and schizophrenia emerge with obvious symptoms. Information on this prodromal period can not only make early treatment possible, but could help scientists understand the origin of the brain changes with the aim of eventually being able to interrupt the process and prevent disease.“This study is the first large effort to document the relevant prodromal factors for bipolar disorder in the context of an unfolding process across time,” said Shelli Avenevoli, Ph.D., acting NIMH deputy director. “It demonstrates the potential of combining dimensional symptoms and family risk to enhance risk prediction and for investigating the nature of the prodrome.”Lead author Danella Hafeman, M.D., Ph.D., said, “The results of this study begin to define an ultra-high risk population, similar to the work that has been done in psychosis. The identification of such a population is important to clinical practice, identifying patients who might require increased surveillance, as well as future research to evaluate strategies for early intervention.”Hafeman DM, Merranko J, Axelson D, Goldstein BI, Goldstein T, Monk K, Hickey MB, Sakolsky D, Diler R, Ivengar S, Brent D, Kupfer D, Birmaher B. Toward the Definition of a Bipolar Prodrome: Dimensional Predictors of Bipolar Spectrum Disorders in At-Risk Youths. Am J Psychiatry. 2016 Feb 19:appiajp201515040414. [Epub ahead of print]MH060952Jim McElroy NIMH Press Office 301-443-4536 NIMHpress@nih.govCharlotte Armstrong NIMH Press Office (301) 443-4536 NIMHpress@nih.govMore News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuDivergent illness processes may point to sex-specific treatmentsAugust 28, 2017 • Science UpdateBrain gene expression associated with depression differed markedly between men and women in a study by NIMH-funded researchers.  Such divergent “transcriptional signatures” may signal divergent underlying illness processes that may require sex-specific treatments, they suggest. Experiments in chronically-stressed male and female mice that developed depression-like behaviors largely confirmed the human findings.NIMH grantee Eric Nestler, M.D., Ph.D., of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, and colleagues, reported their findings online August 21, 2017 in the journal Nature Medicine.Discovering the likely differing causes of “depression” may lead to more precise diagnosis and treatment. Sex differences could hold clues. Women are 2-3 times more likely than men to develop depression. Evidence has been mounting of sex differences in symptoms, treatment responsiveness and brain changes associated with the disorder. But, until now, little was known about molecular mechanisms in specific brain regions that might underlie such differences.To explore these, Nestler’s team sequenced the transcriptomes of six suspect brain regions in postmortem brains of 13 males and 13 females who had depression and 22 unaffected people.In both sexes, all six regions showed illness-linked changes in transcription, when compared to brains of controls. But there was little overlap (5-10 percent) between male and female brains in depression-linked gene expression patterns across the regions. Upon further analysis, males showed only 31 percent of illness-linked modules of co-expressed genes seen in females, and females shared only 26 percent of such modules with males. Moreover, functions of the depression-associated modules largely differed between the sexes. The transcriptional changes affected several brain cell types in males, but mostly neurons in females. Yet, despite the lack of overlap at the level of gene transcripts, several of the same overall molecular pathways were ultimately implicated in depression in both men and women.Similarly, genetically identical male and female mice showed little (20-25 percent) overlap in transcriptional signatures associated with depression-like behaviors experimentally induced by chronic stress. In the brain’s executive hub and reward center, expression of dozens of the same implicated genes increased and decreased in the same sex-specific directions in both humans and mice. This indicated that both species may share sex-specific stress-induced pathology, converging on several of the same biological pathways.“The mouse work allows investigation into the cellular mechanisms by which the observed changes in gene expression lead to changes in neural circuit function and behavior,” explained Laurie Nadler, Ph.D., chief of the NIMH Neuropharmacology Program, which co-funded the study.Using genetic engineering, the researchers uncovered molecular mechanisms underlying the sex-specific effects of changes in activity of two genes never previously linked to depression or stress responses.The study results suggest that depression-related stress susceptibility is mediated by mostly different genes and partly different pathways across the sexes, although these converge in some common outputs. Since genome-wide studies have not turned up sex differences in genetic variation (DNA) associated with depression, the researchers suggest that the differences instead take place at the level of gene transcription. Such changes in similar gene modules organized and expressed differently across brain regions in males and females may disrupt coordinated neural activity needed to cope with stress, they propose.”These findings illustrate the importance of examining sex differences in neuropsychiatric phenomena,” said Dr. Nestler. “They also provide insight into possible approaches for the treatment of depression that selectively target women or men.”Researchers found little overlap between illness-related gene expression changes in postmortem prefrontal cortex (an executive decision-making hub) of depressed men (blue) compared to those found in depressed women (pink). They found more, but still limited, overlap between gene expression changes in the comparable brain region of chronically stressed male and female mice. They say the latter finding is particularly striking, given that the mice were genetically identical, exposed to identical stresses, and subsequently showed equivalent depression-related behavioral abnormalities. The study suggests that depression appears to involve fundamentally different molecular abnormalities in men versus women.Source: Eric Nestler, M.D., Ph.D., Icahn School of Medicine at Mount SinaiSex-specific transcriptional signatures in human depression. Labonté B, Engmann O, Purushothaman I, Menard C, Wang J, Tan C, Scarpa JR, Moy G, Loh YE, Cahill M, Lorsch ZS, Hamilton PJ, Calipari ES, Hodes GE, Issler O, Kronman H, Pfau M, Obradovic ALJ, Dong Y, Neve RL, Russo S, Kazarskis A, Tamminga C, Mechawar N, Turecki G, Zhang B, Shen L, Nestler EJ. Nat Med. 2017 Aug 21. doi: 10.1038/nm.4386. [Epub ahead of print] PMID: 28825715MH096890, MH051399Jules Asher NIMH Press Office 301-443-4536 NIMHpress@nih.govMore News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
Transforming the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.MenuFindings Can Help Target Treatment, Predict OutcomesJuly 18, 2017 • Science UpdateUsing brain imaging to track the effects of treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), scientists have identified a brain circuit on which a frequently used and effective psychotherapy (prolonged exposure) acts to quell symptoms. The findings help explain why the neural circuit identified is a promising target for additional treatment development, including brain stimulation therapies.In an accompanying paper, the authors also report that they have identified hallmarks in brain activity of people with PTSD that predict who will benefit from treatment. Both papers appear online July 18 in the American Journal of Psychiatry.In prolonged exposure treatment for patients with PTSD, trained therapists use deliberate and careful exposure to images, situations, or cues that evoke traumatic memories. The object of the therapy is to reduce fearful associations with these trauma cues and replace them with a sense of safety and control over emotional reactions. The treatment can be very effective, but it has not been clear how it changes brain processes to have a beneficial effect on symptoms.Amit Etkin, M.D., Ph.D., at Stanford University School of Medicine, led a team of scientists collaborating on this work. The study enrolled 66 individuals with PTSD; all underwent functional magnetic resonance brain imaging (fMRI) at rest and while carrying out tasks that engage different aspects of emotional response and regulation. By tracking blood flow, fMRI reveals areas of the brain that are active. Scientists monitor regional brain activity while a subject is carrying out a given task. Participants were then randomly assigned either to treatment with exposure therapy or a waitlist. All then had fMRI scans either following treatment or, if assigned to waitlist, after a comparable waiting period.In participants who received exposure therapy, there were changes in activation observed in a part of the brain nearest the front of the cortex—the seat of higher order brain function, including thought and decision making—when they were doing a reappraisal task which instructed them to reduce their level of distress by interpreting or seeing a negative picture (such as a gruesome scene) differently. The post-treatment changes in the frontopolar cortex were only observed during this task, not with two other tasks that required participants to simply react to emotional cues (such as fearful expression faces), or sort conflicting emotional information (for example if they viewed a fearful face labelled happy).The magnitude of the changes in brain activation observed was greater in participants who had improved to a greater extent in a clinical test of PTSD symptoms. Imaging also revealed an increase in connectivity between the frontopolar cortex and two other brain regions, providing a fuller picture of a brain circuit that exposure therapy acts on. To probe the nature of the connections between these brain regions, the investigators applied magnetic pulses (transcranial magnetic stimulation or TMS) to the frontopolar cortex of healthy subjects; the stimulation deactivated the “downstream” brain areas, confirming a functional connection between the two areas.The frontopolar area of the cortex plays a role in cognitive flexibility, the ability of the brain to shift between different aims and strategies. The team probed whether PTSD treatment changed patterns of activity in this brain circuit at rest by acquiring fMRI scans of subjects while they let their minds wander. In those who had received therapy, there was more varied, changing activity than in those who had not been treated. The investigators suggest that this variability is a signature of flexibility in mental processes.In an accompanying paper, this team reports that brain activation patterns observed in conjunction with certain behavioral tasks can predict who will benefit from exposure therapy; by selecting the most informative measures, the team could predict with more than 95 percent accuracy who would experience improvement in symptoms. As with the post-treatment findings, brain activation patterns seen when TMS was used to probe brain responses prior to treatment paralleled those seen with combined fMRI and behavioral tests. In those study participants who would benefit most from therapy, both sets of tests suggested that the prefrontal cortex exerted a greater regulatory effect on an emotional center in the brain (the amygdala).Tellingly, the elements of brain activation that predicted therapeutic effect were not the same as those that reflected positive effects post-treatment. The brain circuit identified here that predicted whether someone would benefit from therapy was different from the one that changed when therapy was effective, an insight into how multiple circuits may be involved in processes underlying therapeutic change. An important aspect of this study was the use of multiple behavioral tests used to probe brain activation and the inclusion of a control (untreated) group for comparison, allowing the investigators to pinpoint meaningful changes in brain activity and link them, with confidence, to therapy. “This study provides a solid footing for understanding mechanisms so we can start working towards matching people to the treatment most likely to work for them and develop novel therapeutics for directly targeting brain therapy,” said lead author Etkin. “By grounding psychotherapy in brain mechanisms, we can also hopefully decrease stigma, an invisible barrier to care that is so prevalent in psychiatric disorders and prevents people from getting the care that would benefit them.”One motivation for this work is that understanding the biology of a psychosocial intervention can provide information on which to base the design of direct brain circuit interventions, like TMS. Tools like TMS could also be used in a targeted way to enhance (or even enable) the beneficial effects of psychotherapy. “Perhaps the best way to inform and motivate development of novel brain stimulation-based treatment by necessity comes through studying psychotherapy, the oldest and most interpersonal treatment we have in psychiatry,” said Etkin.The work is in keeping with NIMH’s efforts to foster research aimed at developing a circuit-based understanding of brain function and psychiatric disorders; Etkin points out that this work shows how the therapeutic effects of psychosocial treatments for brain disorders are, like medication and brain stimulation techniques, grounded in biology.Fonzo GA et al. PTSD psychotherapy outcome predicted by brain activation during emotional reactivity and regulation. American Journal of Psychiatry. Published online July 18, 2017.  https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2017.16091072Fonzo GA et al. Selective effects of psychotherapy on frontopolar cortical function in PTSD. American Journal of Psychiatry. Published online July 18, 2017. https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2017.16091073MH091860, 019938NCT01507948About the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH): The mission of the NIMH is to transform the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses through basic and clinical research, paving the way for prevention, recovery and cure. For more information, visit the NIMH website.About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit the NIH website.NIH…Turning Discovery Into Health®Charlotte Armstrong NIMH Press Office (301) 443-4536 NIMHpress@nih.govMore News From the Field...The National Institute of Mental Health Information Resource CenterAvailable in English and EspañolHours: 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. eastern time, M-FPhone:  1-866-615-6464  TTY:  1-301-443-8431  TTY (toll-free):  1-866-415-8051Live Online Chat:  Talk to a representative  Email:  nimhinfo@nih.gov  Fax:  1-301-443-4279Mail:  National Institute of Mental HealthOffice of Science Policy, Planning, and Communications6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200, MSC 9663Bethesda, MD 20892-9663The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.Top
